
## [HOME](scrolls/home)

# III-I-A
 
 Part III.


SYNTHETIC PART.




                                Section I.


Introversion And Regeneration.



A. Introversion And Intro-Determination.


The multiple interpretation of works of fantasy has become our problem,
and the diametrical opposition of the psychoanalytic and the anagogic
interpretation has particularly struck us. The question now apparently
becomes more complicated if I show that the psychoanalytic interpretation
contains an analogue that we must take into consideration. The analogue is
presented by the remarkable coexistence of symbolism of material and
functional categories in the same work of imagination. In order to make
myself intelligible, I must first of all explain what these categories
are.

In division 2 of the introductory part we have seen that the imagination
shows a predilection for symbolic forms of expression, proportionately
greater indeed, the more dreamlike it is. Now by this symbolism as we
observe most clearly in hypnagogic (half dreaming) hallucinations and in
dreams, three different groups of objects are represented.

I. Thought contents, imagination contents, in brief, the contents or
objects of thinking and imagining, the material of thought whether it be
conscious or unconscious.

II. The condition, activity, structure of the psyche, the way and manner
that it functions and feels, the method of functioning of the psyche,
whether it be conscious or unconscious.

III. Somatic processes (bodily stimulations). This third sort of objects
is closely coördinated with the other two. It is not capable of
interesting us in the present connection so we pass it by.

Therefore we arrive at two categories in which we can enroll all
symbolizing works of the imagination, the material and the functional.

I. The material category is characterized by its representation of thought
contents, i.e., of contents that are worked out in a train of thoughts
(arranged thought, imagined), whether they are mere images or groups of
images, concepts that are somewhat drawn out into comparisons and
definition processes, or indeed judgments, trains of reasoning, which
serve as analytic or synthetic operations, etc. Since, as we know, the
phantasies (dreams, reveries, even poems) are mostly inspired by wishes,
it will prove frequently the case that the contents symbolically contained
in them are wish images, i.e., the imagined experiencing of gratification.

II. The functional category is characterized by the fact that the
condition, structure or capacity for work of the individual consciousness
(or the psychic apparatus) is itself portrayed. It is termed functional
because it has nothing to do with the material or the contents of the act
of thinking, but applies merely to manner and method in which
consciousness functions (rapid, slow, easy, hard, obstructed, careless,
joyful, forced; fruitless, successful; disunited, split into complexes,
united, interchangeable, troubled, etc.). [It is immaterial whether these
are conscious or unconscious. Thinking must be taken here in the widest
possible sense. It means here all psychic processes that can have anything
as an “object.”]

Two typical examples will enable us at once clearly to understand the two
categories and keep them separate.

A. Material Symbolism.—Conditions. In a drowsy state I reflect upon the
nature of the judgments that are transsubjectively (= for all men) valid.
All at once the thread of the abstract thought is broken and
autosymbolically in the place of it is presented the following hypnagogic
hallucination:

Symbol. An enormous circle, or transparent sphere, floats in the air and
men are putting their heads into this circle.

Interpretation. In this symbol everything that I was thinking of is
expressed. The validity of the transsubjective concerns all men without
exception; the circle goes through all the heads. This validity must have
its cause in something common to all. The heads all belong to the same
apparently homogeneous sphere. Not all judgments are transsubjective; with
their bodies and limbs men are outside of and under the sphere and stand
on the earth as separate individuals.

B. Functional Symbolism.—Conditions. Dreamy state as above. I reflect upon
something or other, and yet in allowing myself to stray into bypaths of
thought, I am diverted from my peculiar theme. When I want to get back the
autosymbolic phenomenon appears.

Symbol. I am climbing mountains. The nearer mountains shut out my view of
the more distant ones, from which I have come and to which I should like
to return.

Meaning. I have got off the track. I have ventured too high and the ideas
that I have entertained shut out my starting point like the mountains.

To the material category belongs, for example, the meaning of the
strawberry dream explained in the second part of the introductory chapter.
Strawberry picking is a symbol for an imaged wish gratification (sexual
intercourse), and so for an image content. The symbolism is therefore a
material one. The greatly preponderating part of psychoanalytic dream
literature is occupied with interpretation according to material
categories.

To the functional categories belong, for example, the symbolism of falling
asleep and waking up, which I have mentioned in the second part in
connection with the interpretation of the parable.

The two categories of symbolism, if they never did anything but parallel
each other, would afford us no analogues for our problem of double
meaning. Now the cases, however, are extremely rare where there is only
functional or only material symbolism; the rule is an intimate
interweaving of both. To be sure, one is frequently more emphasized than
the other or more easily accessible, but we can generally find cases where
long contexts of images are susceptible of material as well as functional
interpretation, alike in detail and continuity of connection.

The following may serve as a very simple case in point. Lying one evening
in bed and exhausted and about to fall asleep, I devoted my thoughts to
the laborious progress of the human spirit in the dim transcendant
province of the mothers-problem. (Faust, Part II.) More and more sleepy
and ever less able to retain my thoughts, I saw suddenly with the
vividness of an illusion a dream image. I stood on a lonely stone pier
extending far into a dark sea. The waters of the sea blended at the
horizon with an equally dark-toned mysterious, heavy air. The overpowering
force of this tangible picture aroused me from my half sleeping state, and
I at once recognized that the image, so nearly an hallucination, was but a
visibly symbolic embodiment of my thought content that had been allowed to
lapse as a result of my fatigue. The symbol is easily recognized as such.
The extension into the dark sea corresponds to the pushing on into a dark
problem. The blending of atmosphere and water, the imperceptible gradation
from one to the other means that with the “mothers” (as Mephistopheles
pictures it) all times and places are fused, that there we have no
boundaries between a “here” and a “there,” an “above” and a “below,” and
for this reason Mephistopheles can say to Faust on his departure,


    “Plunge then.—I could as well say soar.”


We see therefore between the visualized image and the thought content,
which is, as it were, represented by it, a number of relations. The whole
image resolves itself insofar as it has characteristic features, almost
entirely into such elements as are most closely related to the thought
content. Apart from these connections of the material category, the image
represents also my momentary psychic condition (transition to sleep).
Whoever is going to sleep is, as it were, in the mental state of sinking
into a dark sea. (The sinking into water or darkness, entrance into a
forest, etc., are frequently-occurring threshold symbols.) The clearness
of ideas vanishes there and everything melts together just as did the
water and the atmosphere in the image.

This example is but to illustrate; it is in itself much too slight and
simple to make any striking revelation of the remarkable interlacing of
the two kinds of symbolism. I refer to my studies on symbolism and on
dreams in the bibliography. Exhaustive treatment at this point would lead
us too far afield. Let us rest satisfied then with the facts that the
psychoanalysts simultaneously deal with two fundamentally different lines
of interpretation in a product of the phantasy (dream, etc.), quite apart
from the multiple determinants which they can find within the material as
well as in the functional categories; both lines of interpretation are
supplied by the same fabric of images, indeed often by the same elements
of this image fabric. This context therefore must have been sought out
artfully enough by the creative unconscious to answer the double
requirement.

The coexistence of the material meaning with the functional is not
entirely puzzling to the student of psychoanalysis. Two facts must be kept
in mind throughout.

In the first place, we are acquainted with the principle of multiple
determination or condensation. The multiplicity of the dimly moving latent
dream thoughts condenses into a few clear dream forms or symbols, so that
one symbol continually, as it were, appears as the representative of
several ideas, and is therefore interpretable in several ways. That it
should be susceptible of more than one interpretation can cause no
surprise because the fundamental significance (the latent thoughts) were
the very ones that, by association, caused the selection of the symbols
from an infinite series of possibilities. In the shaping of the dream, and
therefore in the unconscious dream work, only such pictorial elements
could penetrate into consciousness as satisfied the requirements of the
multiple determination. The principle of multiple determination is valid
not only within the material and the functional categories, but makes the
fusion of both in the symbol in question to some extent intelligible.
Elements of both categories take an active part in the choice of the
symbol. On the one hand, a number of affects press on towards the symbolic
representation of objects to which they direct themselves (objects of
love, hate, etc.). On the other hand, the psyche takes cognizance of its
own impulses, play of affects, etc., and this perception will gain
representation. Both impulses take part in the choice of those symbols
which thrust themselves into the nascent consciousness of phantasy, and so
the dream, like the poem, etc., besides the symbolism of the wish
tendencies (material categories) that animate them, bears the stamp of the
psychic authorship (functional category) of the dreamer or the author.
[Ferenczi defends the view for the myth also that the material symbolism
must coincide with the functional (Imago I, p. 283).]

Secondly, it has been shown in recent times in psychoanalytic studies that
symbols which were originally material pass over to functional use. If we
thoroughly analyze for a sufficient time the dreams of a person we shall
find that certain symbols which at first probably appeared only
incidentally to signify some idea content, wish content, etc., return and
become a persistent or typical form. And the more such a typical form is
established and is impressed, the farther it is removed from its first
ephemeral meaning, and the more it becomes a symbolic representative of a
whole group of similar experiences, a spiritual capital, so to speak, till
finally we can regard it simply as the representative of a spiritual
current (love, hate, tendency to frivolity, to cruelty, to anxiety, etc.).
What has been accomplished there is a transition from the material to the
functional on the path of a determination inward or intro-determination
(verinnerlichung) as I shall call it. Later I shall have more to say about
intro-determination. For the present this may suffice for the
understanding, that the material and the functional symbolism, in spite of
their at first apparently fundamental difference, are essentially related
in some way, which is illuminated by the process of intro-determination.

The analogue of the problem of multiple interpretation unfolded in the
preceding section is shown to be a question that can be easily answered.
And we would bring our problem to a generally satisfactory position if we
succeeded in showing that the anagogic interpretation, whose alignment
with the psychoanalytic seemed so impracticable, is a form of functional
interpretation, or at least related to it. In this case it would be at
once comprehensible how a product of the imagination harmonizes with
several expositions (problem of multiple interpretation); because this
variety of sense had already operated in the selection of the symbol and
indeed, in those cases as well where we did not at first sight suspect the
coöperation of the anagogic thoughts; secondly, the anagogic and the
psychoanalytic interpretations are somehow reconciled to each other,
whereby possibly also the position of the natural science interpretation
can be made somewhat clearer.

The possibility that the anagogic has some part in the creation of the
functional, will be brought nearer by the fact that our previously offered
anagogic expositions (fairy tales, parabola) markedly resemble functional
interpretations. In the tale of the six swans Hitchcock explains the
reception of the maiden into the castle as the reception of sin into the
heart; the seven children are the seven virtues (consequently spiritual
tendencies). The small maiden is conscience, the tissues are processes of
thought. In the story of the three feathers, again, one son is conscience;
the secret door is the entrance to the inner life, to spiritual
absorption, the three feathers are spiritual tendencies, etc. In the dream
of the “flying post” conscience appears as the conductor. The “Mills of
God,” which psychologically also represents conscience, the more
strikingly because the burden of sin, guilty feeling, drives them, also
appear in the parable. The lion or the dragon which must be overcome on
the mystic path is again a spiritual force. The approximation to the
functional category is not to be denied. Processes that show an interplay
of spiritual powers are symbolically represented there. But we are at once
struck with a difference. The true functional phenomenon, as I have so far
described it, pictures the actual psychic state or process; the anagogic
image appears on the contrary to point to a state or process that is to be
experienced in the future. We shall pass over for a time the last topic,
which will not, however, be forgotten, and turn to the question as to the
point on which the anagogic and the functional interpretations can best be
brought together. This point appears to me to be introversion, first
because it is related to the previously mentioned intro-determination, and
second, because it is familiar to psychoanalysis and is of great
importance in anagogic method.

The term “introversion” comes from C. G. Jung. It means sinking into one’s
own soul; the withdrawal of interest from the outer world; the seeking for
joys that can be afforded by the inner world. The psychology of the
neuroses has led to the concept of introversion, a province, therefore,
which principally treats of morbid forms and functions of introversion.
The sinking of oneself into one’s own soul also appears exactly as a
morbid losing of oneself in it. We can speak of introversion neuroses.
Jung regards dementia precox as an introversion neurosis. Freud, who has
adopted the concept of introversion [with some restrictions] regards the
introversion of the libido as a regular and necessary precondition of
every psychoneurosis. Jung (Jb. ps. F., III, p. 159) speaks of “certain
mental disturbances [he means dementia precox] which are induced by the
fact that the patients retire more and more from reality, sink into their
phantasy, whereby in proportion as reality loses its force, the inner
world takes on a reality and determining power.” We may also define
introversion as a resignation of the joys of the outer world (probably
unattainable or become troubled) and a seeking for the libido sources in
one’s own ego. So we see how generally self-chastisement, introversion and
autoerotism are connected.

The turning away from the outer world and turning in to the inner, is
required by all those methods which lead to intensive exercise of religion
and a mystic life. The experts in mysteries provide for opportunities that
should encourage introversion. Cloisters and churches are institutions of
introversion. The symbolism of religious doctrine and rite is full of
images of introversion, which is, in short, one of the most important
presuppositions of mysticism.

Religious and mythical symbolism has countless images for introversion;
e.g., dying, going down, subterranean crypts, vaults, dark temples, into
the underworld, hell, the sea, etc.; being swallowed by a monster or a
fish (as Jonah), stay in the wilderness, etc. The symbols for introversion
correspond in large part with those that I have described for going to
sleep and waking (threshold symbolism), a fact that can be readily
appreciated from their actual similarity. The descent of Faust to the
mothers is an introversion symbol. Introversion fulfills here clearly the
aim of bringing to reality, i.e., to psychological reality, something that
is attainable only by phantasy (world of the past, Helen).

In Jacob Boehme (De Vita Mentali) the disciple says to the master, “How
may I attain suprasensuous life, so that I may see God and hear him
speak?” The master says, “When you can lift yourself for one moment into
that realm where no creature dwelleth, you will hear what God speaks.” The
disciple says, “Is that near or far?” The master says, “It is in
yourself.”

The hermetics often urge retirement, prayer and meditation, as
prerequisites for the work; it is treated of still more in the
hieroglyphic pictures themselves. The picture of death is already familiar
to us from the hermetic writings, but in the technical language there are
still other expressions for introversion, e.g., the shutting up in the
receptacle, the solution in the mercury of the sages, the return of the
substance to its radical condition (by means of the "radical" or root
dampness).

Similar features in our parable are the wandering in the dense forest, the
stay in the lion’s den, the going through the dark passage into the
garden, the being shut up in the prison or, in the language of alchemy,
the receptacle.

Introversion is continually connected with regression. Regression, as may
be recalled from the 2d section of Part I, is a harking back to more
primitive psychic activities, from thinking to gazing, from doing to
hallucinating; a striving back towards childhood and the pleasures of
childhood. Introversion accordingly is accompanied by a desire for
symbolic form of expression (the mystical education is carried on in
symbols), and causes the infantile imagos to revive—chiefly the mother
image. It was pre-eminently father and mother who appeared as objects of
childish love, as well as of defiance. They are unique and imperishable,
and in the life of adults there is no difficulty in reawakening and making
active those memories and those imagos. We easily comprehend the fact that
the symbolic aim of the previously mentioned katabasis always has a
maternal character; earth, hole, sea, belly of fish, etc., that all are
symbols for mother and womb. Regression revives the Œdipus complex with
its thoughts of incest, etc. Regression leads back to all these relics now
done away with in life and repressed. It actually leads into a sort of
underworld, into the world of titanic wishes, as I have called them. How
far this was the case in the alchemistic parable, I have fully shown in
the psychoanalytic treatment of it. Here I need merely to refer to the
maternal nature of the symbols cited: receptacle, mercury of the sages
(“mother of metals”) and radical moisture, also called “milk” and the
like.

Fairy tales have frequently a very pretty functional symbolism for the way
in which introversion leads to the mother imago. Thus the simpleton in the
fairy tale of the feathers comes through the gate of introversion exactly
into the family circle, to the mother that cares for him. There his love
finds its satisfaction. There he even gets a daughter, replica of the
mother imago, for a wife.

In the parable the wandering in the forest (introversion) is followed by
the battle (suggestive of incest) with the lion (father or mother in their
awe inspiring form); the inclusion in the receptacle (introversion) by the
accomplishment of the incest.

If it is now clear also that in introversion, as a result of the
regression that is connected with it, visions of “titanic” emotions
(incest, separating of parents, etc.) are encountered, yet it has not
become in the slightest degree comprehensible how these visions are
related to the treatment of anagogic ideas. And that is indeed the
question.

We can really understand these striking facts better if we recall what I
have said above about the type formation and the intro-determination of
the symbols, namely, that symbols can depart from their original narrower
meaning and become types for an entire class of experiences whereby an
advance is made from the material to the functional meaning. Some examples
will elucidate this.

I have observed particularly fine cases of intro-determination in a series
of experiments in basin divination (lecanomancy) which I have carried on
for several years. Lecanomancy resembles crystal gazing, except that the
gazer looks into a basin of water. In the visions of my subject, Lea,
typical forms were pictured, which always recurred. Regarded as symbols
they were, as subsequent analysis showed, almost all subjected to inward
accentuation or intro-determination. Thus, for instance, a black cat
appeared. At first it appeared as representative of Lea’s grandmother, who
was cat-like, malicious and fawning. Later the cat stood for the
corresponding traits that she perceived in herself. Above all the cat is
the symbol of her grandmother, so the grandmother (or cat) is a mental
current of Lea. Frequently there appears in the image a Dyas, sometimes in
the shape of a two-headed snake, of two hands, of two feet, or of a woman
with two faces, etc. Above all, every antithesis appears to have some
external meaning, two men who love each other, etc. So it becomes clear
that the common element which finds its most pregnant expression in the
double faced woman is the Dyas in itself and that it means bisexuality,
psychic hermaphroditism. More than that it is definitely certain that the
deepest sense of the symbol means a complete dissociation of Lea’s
character into two different personalities, one of which may be called the
savage and the other the mild. (Lea herself uses the expressions cynical
and ideal personality.) In one of the later experiments Lea saw her cynic
double vividly personified and spoke in this character, which is closely
related to the “black cat.” The Dyas in the symbols has the value first of
a representation of externals (two lovers, etc.), then as symbols of
bisexuality. The sexual Dyas can again be conceived as a symbol or
characteristic of a still more general and comprehensive dissociation of
the ego. A further symbol and one still more tending towards
intro-determination was death. Starting from connections with definite
external experiences and ideas of actual death, the meaning of the symbol
became more and more spiritual, till it reached the meaning of the fading
away of psychic impulses. What died symbolically or had to die was
represented by an old man who sacrificed himself after suffering all kinds
of fortune. The dying of this old man signified, as analysis showed, the
same thing that we call the “putting off the old Adam” (turning over a new
leaf). The figure of the old man, originally Lea’s grandfather, then her
father, came to have this meaning only after a long process of
intro-determination.

A few more examples for typical figures.

In many dreams of a woman analyzed by me (Pauline, in my treatise Zur
Symbolbildung), a cow appears as a typical image. The alternation of this
cow with more or less definite mother symbols leads to identification of
the cow with the mother. Two circumstantial dreams that were fully
analyzed showed, however, that the cow and other forms with which she
alternated cannot be translated so correctly by the concept of mother as
by that of the maternal authority and finally still more correctly by
self-criticism or conscience, of which maternal authority is but a type.
Children figure in Pauline’s case as a result of various experiences, as
typical of obstacles.

In the case of another dreamer the father stands in similar relation as
the determinant that paralyzes his resolutions.

The climbing of an ascent, usually a symbol of coitus (hurrying upward
which makes us out of breath), turns out often in a deeper relation as the
effort to get from the disagreeable things of life to a place of retreat
(lonely attics, etc.), inaccessible to other persons (= thoughts); and now
we see that this deeper meaning appears without prejudice to the first,
for even coitus, like all transport, is only a special case of flight from
the outer life, one of the forms of spiritual oblivion. Hence in part the
mythologically and psychopathologically important comparison of
intoxication, intoxicating drink and sperm, soma and semen. Ascent =
coitus is in this case a type for a quite comprehensive class of
experience.

Marcinowski found in his analyses that the father in dream life often was
a “symbol of an outlived, obsolete attitude.” (Z. Bl. f. Ps., II, 9.)

Other examples of types are the phallus, the sun and other religiously
revered objects, if we regard them as does Jung (Wandl. u. Sym., Jb. ps.
F., III-IV) as a symbol of the libido. [The concept of which is extended
by Jung almost to Schopenhauer’s Will.] The typical character of divine
personalities is moreover quite clearly emphasized by Jung himself.

The snake, about whose significance as a “negative phallus,” etc.
[developed in detail by Jung], we shall have more to say, can also be
regarded as a typical image. Bull, cow and other animal forms are in
mythology as in dreams typical transmutations, with unlimited possibility
of intro-determination. Dogs are often in dreams the representations of
animal propensities. The beast is often “la bête humaine” in the dreamer’s
own inner life. We have become acquainted with the terrible lions, the
bears, etc., as father types; here we get a new perspective which makes
clear the one-sidedness of our first conception.

Since psychoanalysis has found acceptation, many of its followers believe
they are able to solve, with their work of analysis alone, all the
psychological, esthetic and mythological problems that come up. We
understand only half of the psychic impulses, as indeed we do all
spiritual development, if we look merely at the root. We have to regard
not merely whence we come but also whither we go. Then only can the course
of the psyche be comprehended, ontogenetically as well as
phylogenetically, according to a dynamic scheme as it were.

If we apply this fundamental principle to symbolism there develops
therefrom the obligation to keep both visible poles in view, between which
the advance of significance, the process of intro-determination is
completed. (An externalization is also possible, yet the internalization
or intro-determination must be regarded as the normal process.) [It
corresponds namely to the process of education and progress of culture.
This will soon be cleared up.] To the most general type belong then,
without doubt, those symbols or frequently disguised images, concerning
which we wondered before, that besides representing “titanic” tendencies,
they are fitted to represent the anagogic. The solution of the riddle is
found the instant we regard these images as types with a certain degree of
intro-determination, as types for a few fundamental forces of the soul,
with which we are all endowed, and whose typical symbols are for that
reason of general applicability. [I will therefore call these types the
human elementary types.] For example, if by psychoanalysis we deduce
father and mother, etc., from some of the symbols appearing in dreams, we
have in these representations of the psychic images, as the psychoanalyst
calls them, in reality derived mere types whose meaning will change
according to the ways of viewing them, somewhat as the color of many
minerals changes according to the angle at which we hold them to the
light. The actual father or mother, the experiences that surrounded them,
were the material used in the formation of the types; they were external
things even if important, while later the father, etc., emerging as
symbol, may have significance as a type of the spiritual power of the very
person in question; a spiritual power to be sure, which the person in
question feels to be like a father for otherwise the father figure would
not be suited for the symbol. And we can go so far as to call this
spiritual power a father image. That should not however, mislead us into
taking that real person, who in the individual case generally (though not
always) has furnished the type, for the real or the most essential. The
innermost lies in ourselves and is only fashioned and exercised upon
persons of the external world.

So then we get for the typical symbol a double perspective. The types are
given, we can look through them forward and backward. In both cases there
will be distortions of the image; we shall frequently see projected upon
each other, things that do not belong together, we shall perceive
convergences at vanishing points which are to be ascribed only to
perspective. I might for brevity’s sake call the errors so resulting
errors of superposition. The significance of this concept will, I hope,
come to have still greater validity in psychoanalysis. [This error of
superposition C. G. Jung attempts to unmask, when he writes: “As libido
has a forward tendency, so in a way, incest is that which tends backward
into childhood. It is not incest for the child, and only for the adult,
who possesses a well constituted sexuality, does this regressive tendency
become incest in that he is no longer a child, but has a sexuality that
really no longer can suffer a regressive application.” (Jung, Psychology
of the Unconscious.) It may moreover be remarked that Freud also is
careful not to take the incest disclosed by psychoanalysis in too physical
a sense.] This error of superposition is found not only in the view
backward but in the forward view. So what I, as interpreter of mystical
symbolism, may say about the possible development of the soul will be
affected by this error of superposition. It is not in my power to correct
it. In spite of everything, the treatment of symbolism from the two points
of view must be superior to the onesided treatment; in order to
approximate a fundamental comprehension, which to be sure remains an
ideal, the different aspects must be combined and in order to make this
clear I have added a synthetic treatment to the analytic part of my work.

Looking back through the elementary types, we see the infantile images
together with those non-moral origins that psychoanalysis discovers in us;
looking forward we notice thoughts directed to certain goals that will be
mentioned later. The elementary types themselves thanks to
intro-determination represent however a collection of our spiritual
powers, which we have first formed and exercised at the time that the
images arose, and which are in their nature closely related to these
images, indeed completely united with them as a result of the errors of
superposition—this collection of powers, I say, accompanies us through our
entire life and is that from which are taken the powers that will be
required for future development. The objects or applications change, the
powers remain almost the same. The symbolism of the material categories
which depends on external things changes with them; but the symbolism of
the functional categories, which reflects these powers remains constant.
The types with their intro-determination belong to the functional
categories; and so they picture the constant characters.

That experience to which the suggestions of symbolism (brought to verbal
expression by means of introversion) point as to a possible spiritual
development, corresponds to a religious ideal; when intensively lived out
this development is called mysticism. [We can define mysticism as that
religious state which struggles by the shortest way towards the
accomplishment of the end of religion, the union with the divinity; or as
an intensive cultivation of oneself in order to experience this union.] It
presents itself if instead of looking backward we gaze forward from our
elementary types to the beyond. But let us not forget that we can regard
mysticism only as the most extreme, and therefore psychically the most
internal, unfolding of the religious life, as the ideal which is hardly to
be attained, although I consider that much is possible in this direction.
If my later examination carries us right into the heart of mysticism,
without making the standpoint clear every time, we now know what
restrictions we must be prepared for.

If I take the view that those powers, whose images (generally veiled in
symbolism) are the elementary types, do not change, I do not intend to
imply that it is not possible to sublimate them. With the increasing
education of man they support a sublimation of the human race which yet
shows in recognizable form the fundamental nature of the powers. One of
the most important types, in which this transformation process is
consummated and which refines the impulse and yet allows some of its
character to remain, is the type mother, i.e., incest. Among religious
symbols we find countless incest images but that the narrow concept of
incest is no longer suited to their psychological basis (revealed through
analysis) has been, among psychoanalysts, quite clearly recognized by
Jung. Therefore in the case of every symbolism tending to ethical
development, the anagogic point of view must be considered, and most of
all in religious symbolism. The impulse corresponding to the religious
incest symbols is preeminently to be conceived in the trend toward
introversion and rebirth which will be treated of later. [Vid. note C, at
the end of the volume.]

I have just used the expression “sublimation.” This Freudian term and
concept is found in an exactly similar significance in the hermetic
writers. In the receptacle where the mystical work of education is
performed, i.e., in man, substances are sublimated; in psychological terms
this means that impulses are to be refined and brought from their baseness
to a higher level. Freud makes it clear that the libido, particularly the
unsocial sexual libido, is in favorable circumstances sublimated, i.e.,
changed into a socially available impelling power. This happens in the
evolution of the human race and is recapitulated in the education of the
individual.

I take it for granted that the fundamental character of the elementary
psychic powers in which the sublimation is consummated is the more
recognizable the less the process of sublimation is extended in time. In
mysticism, e.g., the fundamental character penetrates the primal motive
because the latter wishes to lead the relatively slightly sublimated
impulses by a shortened process to the farthest goal of sublimation.
Mysticism undertakes to accomplish in individuals a work that otherwise
would take many generations. What I said therefore about the
unchangeability of the fundamental powers or their primal motive, is
wholly true of its fate in mystical development.

The Mohammedan mystic Arabi (1165-1240) writes, “Love as such, in its
individual life, is the same for sensuous and spiritual, therefore equally
for every Arab (of an allegory) and for me, but the objects of love are
different. They loved sensible phenomena while I, the mystic, love the
most intimate existence.” (Horten, Myst. Texte, p. 12.)

The religious-mystical applications of the fundamental powers represented
by the types, in the sense of a sublimation, does not manifest therefore
in contrast to their retrospective form (titanic, purposeless form) an
essentially foreign nature; the important novelty in them is that they no
longer are used egotistically but have acquired a content that is
ethically valuable, to which the intro-determination was an aid. This
determination, whose external aspects we have noticed in the types or
symbols, is only the visible expression of a far more important actual
intro-determination whose accomplishment lies in an amplification of
personality, and will later be considered in detail.

In the psychoanalytic consideration of the alchemistic parable it would
appear that only the titanic impulses were realized there, e.g., to have
the mother as a lover and to kill the father. Now it corresponds to a
really significant intro-determination when we hear that in the
alchemistic work the father is the same as the son, and when we understand
that the father is a state, or psychic potentiality, of the “son,” whom
the latter in himself, has to conquer, exactly in the same manner as Lea
in the lecomantic study strove to put off the old man.

The alchemist Rulandus (Lex., p. 24) quotes the “Turba”: “Take the white
tree, build him a round, dark, dew-encircled house, and set in it a
hundred year-old man and close it so that no wind or dust can get to him
(introversion); then leave him there eight days. I tell you that that man
will not cease to eat of the fruit of that tree till he becomes a youth. O
what a wonderful nature, for here is the father become son and born
again.” Ibid: “The stone [that is in the anagogic sense, man] is at first
the senex, afterwards young, so it is said filius interficit patrem; the
father must die, the son be born, die with each other and be renewed with
each other.”

We must proceed similarly if we wish to interpret the parable
anagogically.

What I have already taken from the anagogic fairy tale interpretation as a
symbol of introversion shows, of course, also the character of
intro-determination.

As for the nature of the relatively unchangeable spiritual tendencies
represented by the elementary types [That can also be called in
mythological study primal motives] a simple examination of the essentials
without any psychological hair splitting, brings us at once to an
elementary scheme that will help us to understand the changes
(intro-determination) that take place in accordance with the elementary
types. We need here only to examine the simplest reactions of the
individual, necessarily produced by rubbing up again the external world;
reactions which become persistent forms of experience that are
approximately as self-evident as the libido itself. The degree of egoism
which is active in the elementary tendencies must, according to the
experience of psychoanalysis, be considered very great. For this purpose I
have selected in what follows an excessively egotistical expression for
the “titanic” aspect, the retrospective form, of the tendencies; and this
same excessive expression which would seem to be rather objectionable when
applied to the basis of a religious development, enables us, thanks to the
principle of intro-determination, to understand this development.

Starting from the libido in the most general sense we arrive first of all
at the two phenomena, the agreeableness and the disagreeableness, from
which results at once, acceptance and aversion. Obstacles may aggravate
both activities, so that acceptance becomes robbery and aversion becomes
annihilation. These possibilities can to be sure only become acts in so
far as they prove practically feasible. In all cases they are present in
the psyche, and in this crude primal form play no small part in the soul
of the child. It is indeed only a blind sentimentality that can raise the
child to an angelic status, from which it is as far removed as from its
opposite. We should be careful not to regard the crude form of the impulse
as crude in the sense of an educated humanity, which must see in the
crudeness something morally inferior. In robbery and annihilation there
exists on the primitive or childish level hardly the slightest germ of
badness. There is much to be said about the psychology and morality of the
child. I cannot, however, enter very deeply into this broad topic,
interesting though it is.

The primal tendencies, when directed toward the persons in the
environment, produce certain typical phenomena. I can unfortunately
describe them only with expressions which, if the cultured man uses them,
evoke the idea of crime. An ethically colorless language should be made
available for these things. [The dream and the myth have found for them
the language of symbolism.] The opposition of a fellow man against the
working out of an impulse arouses a tendency to overcome this man, to get
him out of the way, to kill him. The type of the obstructing man is always
the instructor (father, eventually mother). That he is at the same time a
doer of good is less appreciated because the psychical apparatus takes the
satisfaction of desires as the natural thing, which does not excite its
energy nearly as much as does a hindrance to its satisfaction.
[Recognition of a good deed, thankfulness, etc., regularly presuppose
sublimation; they do not belong to the titanic aspect. A form of
appreciation of this kindness however comes to mind. Towards the mother
there occurs on the part of the child, though it has been completely
overlooked for a long time, very early and gradually increasing, a
sexually-toned feeling, although the manifestations of this feeling are
very dim and at times may completely disappear. In this “love” is
contained a germ of desire, of erotic appropriation-to-self. Any woman in
the environment and especially the mother must needs supply the ideal of
the desired woman. In so far as the father is perceived as an obstacle to
the love towards the mother he must, in the elementary tendency, be killed
to remove the obstacle, and there arises the murder impulse belonging to
the Œdipus Complex. [The child has no clear idea of death. It is only a
matter of wishing to have some one out of the way. If this primal motive
appears to us subsequently as a “killing,” it is again only because of the
error of superposition, just as in the later mentioned “rape.”] In so far
as the mother herself does not meet the desired tenderness or in refusing,
acts as a corrective agent, while carrying on the education, she, too,
becomes an obstacle, a personality contrasting with the “dear” mother, a
contrast which plunges the psyche in anxiety and bitterness. Anxiety comes
principally from the conflict of psychical tendencies, which result from
the same person being both loved and hated. The correlative to the denying
action of the mother is to commit rape on her. Another cause of the
attraction towards the mother besides the erotically toned one, is the
desire for her care, called forth by the hardships encountered elsewhere
in the world. It is an indolence opposed to the duties of life. The
propensity towards ease is psychologically a very important factor. The
home is in general the place of protection; the characteristic embodiment
of this is preëminently the mother. We speak of maternal solicitude but
less of paternal solicitude. I have noted the solicitous mother type in
the story of the three feathers, where the mother toad bestows the gifts
from the big box. In so far as the solicitous person refuses the requests
made of her and for reasons of necessity thrusts the child out into the
world, or in so far as any other obstacles (demands of life) stand in the
way of the gratification of the lazy, “feed me” state of mind, like the
angel with the flaming sword before the entrance to paradise, so far the
obstructing power appears as the type of the “terrible” mother, a picture
whose terribleness is yet intensified by the working of the incest
conflict. In this aspect therefore the otherwise beloved mother is a
hostile personality.

To the process of education on the part of the parents, felt as pedantry
by the child, or to otherwise misunderstood action, he opposes a well
known defiance, and there results, as also from the attempt to change in
general the rough path of life, the hopeful attempt to get a creative
“improvement,” which I have already discussed. The wish to die sometimes
occurs. Further the obstacles that stand in the way of the full erotic
life in the external world, in so far as they are insuperable or are not
overcome on account of laziness, lead to autoerotism. (That this is found
even in early childhood is for the mechanism of the impulses, a
side-issue. The scheme just given is not to be regarded as a historical or
chronological development, but the tendencies are quite as intimately
connected with each other as with the acquisition of the psychical
restraints that are not generally brought to view; in separating them we
commit something like an error.)

We have considered the following main forces: 1. Removal of obstacles. 2.
Desire for the solicitude of the parents. 3. Desire for the pleasurable
[especially of the woman]. 4. Auto-erotism. 5-6. Improvement and
re-creation. 7. Death wish. The following scheme shows the retrograde
(titanic) as well as the anagogic aspect of these powers, which later
corresponds to an intro-determination of the types, and a species of
sublimation of impulses.

RETROGRADE ASPECT.               ANAGOGIC ASPECT.
1. Killing of the father.        Killing of the old Adam.
2. Desire for the mother         Introversion.
(laziness).
3. Incest.                       Love towards an Ideal.
4. Auto-erotism.                 Siddhi.(4)
5. Copulation with the mother.   Spiritual regeneration.
6. Improvement.                  Re-creation.(5)
7. Death wish.                   Attainment of the ideal.

We need not scent anything extraordinary behind these
intro-determinations, as the scheme is here indeed only roughly sketched;
they take place in each and every one of us, otherwise we should be mere
beasts. Only they do not in every one of us rise to the intensity of the
mystical life.

A more careful inquiry into the mechanism of the psychic powers in the
development of mysticism, would show in greater detail how everything that
happens is utilized toward intro-determination in the process of
education. It would be interesting as an example to discover the
application of the special senses to introversion and ascertain the fate
of the sense qualities. It is quite remarkable what a prominent rôle
tastes and smells often play in descriptions given by persons who have
followed the path of mysticism. I mention the odor of sanctity and its
opposite in the devilish, evil odor. The experimenter in magic
Staudenmaier, who will be mentioned later, has established in his own case
the coördination of his partial souls (personifications, autonomous
complexes) to definite bodily functions and to definite organs. Certain
evil, partial souls, which appear to him in hallucinations as diabolical
goat faces, were connected with the function of certain parts of the lower
intestine.

Mysticism stimulates a much more powerful sublimation of impulses than the
conventional education of men. So it is not strange if intro-determination
does not accomplish its desires quickly but remains fragmentary. In such
unfortunate or fragmentary cases, the inward-determined powers show more
than mere traces of their less refined past. The heroes of such miscarried
mysticism appear as rather extraordinary saints. So, for instance, Count
von Zinzendorf’s warm love of the Savior has so much of the sensual
flavor, with furthermore such decided perversities, that the outpourings
of his rapture are positively laughable. Thus the pious man indulges his
phantasy with a marked predilection for voluptuousness in the
“Seitenhölchen” (Wound in the Side) in Jesus’ body and with an
unmistakable identification of this “cleft” with the vulva.

Examples of the poetical creations of Zinzendorf and his faithful
followers are given:


    So ever-sideways-squinting
    So side-homesickness-feeling;
    So lambs-hearts-grave-through crawling,
    So lambs-sweat-trace-smelling.

    So Jesus sweat-drop-yielding,
    With love’s fever trembling
    Like the child full of spirit.
    So corpse-air-imbibing,
    So wound-wet-emitting,
    So grave-fume-sniffing.

    So martyr-lamb’s heart-like,
    So Jesus-boy-like,
    So Mary Magdalene-like being,
    Childlike, virgin-like, conjugal
    Will the lamb keep us
    Close to the kiss of his clefts.

    With us Cross people
    The closet of the side often is worth
    The whole little lamb.
    Ye poor sinners.
    But deep, but deep within,
    Yes deep, right deep within,
    And whoever will be blessed
    He wishes himself within
    Into the dear rendezvous
    Of all the darlings.
    Ravishing little lamb.
    I, poor little thing, I kiss the ring
    On thy little ringer,
    Thou wound of the spear
    Hold thy little mouth near,
    It must be kissed.
    Lamb, say nothing to me in there
    For this precious minute
    Thou art mine only.


On this curiosity compare the psychological explanations of Pfister.
(Frommigkeit G. Ludw. v. Zinzendorf.)

Returning to the previously mentioned “spiritual powers” I should mention
that alchemy also attempts to include in a short schema the inventory of
powers available for the Great Work. It uses different symbols for this
purpose; one of the most frequent is the seven metals or planets. Whether
I say with the astrologers that the soul (not the celestial spirit, which
is derived from God) flowing in from the seven planets upon man, is
therefore composed of their seven influences, or if with the alchemists I
speak of the seven metals, which come together in the microcosm, it is of
course quite the same, but expressed in another closely related symbol.
The metals are, as we know, incomplete and have to be “improved” or “made
complete.” That means we must sublimate our impulses.

“From the highest to the lowest everything rises by intermediate steps on
the infinite ladder, in such manner that those pictures and images, as
outgrowths of the divine mind, through subordinate divinities and demigods
impart their gifts and emanations to men. The highest of these are: Spirit
of inquiry, power of ruling and mastering self, a brave heart, clearness
of perception, ardent affection, acuteness in the art of exposition, and
fruitful creative power. The efficient forces of all these God has above
all and originally in himself. From him they have received the seven
spirits and divinities, which move and rule the seven planets, and are
called angels, so that each has received his own, distinct from the rest.
They share them again among the seven orders of demons subordinated to
them, one under each. And these finally transmit them to men.” (Adamah
Booz. Sieb. Grunds., p. 9 ff.)

In this enumeration the fundamental powers, whose partition varies
exceedingly, already show a certain measure of intro-determination. If we
wish to contrast their titanic with their anagogic aspect, we get
approximately the following scheme, to which I add the familiar
astrological characters of the seven planets.

Destroying (castration).      [Symbol: Saturn] Introversion.
Mastery.                      [Symbol: Jupiter] Mastery of
                              oneself.
Love of combat.               [Symbol: Mars] Warring against
                              oneself.
Libido.                       [Symbol: Sol] Sublimated
                              libido.
Sexual life, incest.          [Symbol: Venus] Regeneration.
Hypercriticism, fussing.      [Symbol: Mercury] Knowledge.
Joy in change; Improvement.   [Symbol: Luna] Changing
                              oneself.

[Freud is of the opinion that the original inquisitiveness about the
sexual secret is abnormally transformed into morbid over subtlety; and yet
can still furnish an impulsive power for legitimate thirst for knowledge.]

Beside the partition of the fundamental powers according to the favorite
number seven, there are to be sure in alchemy still other schemata with
other symbols. We must furthermore continually keep in mind that the
symbols in alchemy are used in many senses.

In so far as the Constellations, as is often to be understood in the
hermetic art, are fundamental psychic powers, it sounds just like
psychoanalysis when Paracelsus expresses the view that in sleep the
“sidereal” body is in unobstructed operation, soars up to its fathers and
has converse with the stars.

With regard to intro-determination I must refer to my observations in the
following sections on the extension of personality. It is an important
fact that those external obstructions which oppose the unrestrained
unfolding of the titanic impulses are gradually taken up as constraints
into the psyche, which adopts those external laws, that would make life
practicable. In so far as deep conflicts do not hinder it, there arises by
the operation of these laws a corresponding influence upon the
propensities. Habit, however, can learn to carry a heavy yoke with love,
even to make it the condition of life. I have just made the restriction:
if conflicts do not hinder it; now usually these exist, even for the
mystics; and the “Work” is above all directed toward their overcoming. For
the annihilation of the opposition, the weapons aimed outward in the
“titanic” phase must be turned inward; there and not outside of us is the
conflict. [Here we see the actual intro-determination briefly mentioned
above.]


