
## [HOME](scrolls/home)

# III-II
 

  Section II.


The Goal Of The Work.


In the preceding section the symbolism and the psychology of the progress
of the mystic work has been developed more or less, but certainly not to
the end. Regeneration is evidently the beginning of a new development, the
nature of which we have not yet closely examined. Nothing has yet been
said definitely about the later phases of the work and about its goal. I
am afraid that this section, although it is devoted chiefly to the goal of
the work, cannot elucidate it with anything like the clearness that would
be desirable. To be sure the final outcome of the work can be summed up in
the three words: Union with God. Yet we cannot possibly rest satisfied
with a statement that is for our psychological needs so vague; we must
endeavor to comprehend the intimate nature of the spiritual experiences
that we have on the journey into the unsearchable; although I must at the
outset point out that at every step by which the symbolism of the mystics
leads us towards regeneration, we run the risk of wandering away from
psychology, and that in the following we shall all too soon experience
these deviations. We shall have to transplant ourselves uncritically at
times, into the perceptual world of the hermetics, which is, of course, a
mere fiction, for in order to do it rightly we should have to have a
mystical development behind us [whatever this may be]; one would have to
be himself a “twice born.” One thing can be accepted as true, that a
series of symbols that occur with striking agreement among all mystics of
all times and nations is related to a variety of experiences which
evidently are common to all mystics in different degrees of their
development, but are foreign to the non-mystics (or more exactly to all
men, even mystics, who have not attained the given level).

With this premise I will take up the question of the goal of alchemy
(mysticism). In this I follow in general the train of thought of
Hitchcock, without adhering closely to his exposition. (I cite H. A. =
Hitchcock, Remarks upon Alchemy.)

The alchemistic process is, as the hermetics themselves say, a cyclical
work, and the end resides to a certain degree in the beginning. Here lies
one of the greatest mysteries of the whole of alchemy, although the
meaning of the language is to be understood more or less as follows. If,
for example, it is said that whoever wishes to make gold must have gold,
we must suppose that the seeker of truth must _be_ true (H. A., p. 67);
that whoever desires to live in harmony with the conscience must be in
harmony with it, and that whoever will go the way to God, must already
have God in himself. Now when the conscience, wherein the sense of right
and justice has existence, becomes active under the idea of God, it is
endowed with supernatural force and is then, as I understand it, the
alchemists’ philosophical mercury and his valued salt of mercury. It is no
less his sovereign treacle, etc. (H. A., p. 53). The progress of the work
points to some kind of unity as the goal which, however, very few men
attain except in words (H. A., p. 157). The hermetic writers set up the
claim to a complete agreement in their teachings, but this agreement is
restricted to some principles of vital significance in their doctrine,
which have reference almost exclusively to a definite practice; probably
to a complete setting to work of the consciousness of duty, which is what
Kant claims to do with his categorical imperative: “An unreasoning, though
not unreasonable, obedience to an experienced, imperious sense of duty,
leaving the result to God; and this I am disposed to call the Way.”


        Do thy duty!
    Ask not after the result of thy doing!
    Without dependence thereon carry out that which is thy duty!
    Whoever acts without attachment to the world, that man attains the
                loftiest goal.


And the like in many places in the Bhagavad-Gita.

Now the end is perhaps the fruit of this obedience. It may be that the
steady preservation of the inward unity, which regards with composure all
external vicissitudes, leads man finally to some special experience, by
which a seal of confirmation is set upon what was first a mere trust in
the ultimate blessing of rectitude (H. A., p. 128). The hermetic
philosophers would have the conscience known as the Way or as the base of
the work, but with regard to the peculiar wonder work of alchemy
(transmutation) they place the chief value on love; it effects the
transformation of the _subject_ into the _object_ loved (H. A., p. 132).

Arabi: “It is a fundamental principle of love that thou becomest the real
essence of the beloved (God) in that thou givest up thy individuality and
disappearest in him. Blessedness is the abiding place of the divine and
holy joy.” (Horten, Myst., I, p. 9.)

Similarly we find in the yoga primers that the spirit, by sinking into an
object of perception, becomes identical with the object. The object need
not be the very highest, but a gradation is possible. Arabi, too,
recognizes a gradation of objects, as they correspond, as correlates of
sinking or surrender, to the different mystical states. [Colors, etc., of
alchemy.] Two passages of Arabi may be quoted: “My heart is eligible for
every form [of the religious cult]; for it is said that the heart (root:
kalaba = overturn, to alter oneself) is so called from its continual
changing.” It changes in accordance with the various (divine) influences
that it feels, according to the various states of the mystical
illumination. This variation of experiences is a result of the variation
of the divine appearances, which occur in its inmost spirit. The law of
religion (theology) speaks of this phenomenon as the changing and
metamorphizing in the forms (of living and being). Gazelles are the
objects of the mystic’s love. In one of his poems he says: “And surrender
yourselves to play in the manner of lovely maidens with buxom breasts and
enjoy the luxuriant willows in the manner of the female gazelles.” In his
commentary on this passage he says: “ ‘Play’ denotes the various states of
the mystic, to which he is advanced when he passes from one divine name to
another.” (Horten, Myst., I, pp. 11, 13, ff.)

It is the ethical ideal of the mystic, more and more to put off the
limited ego, and to take on in its place the qualities of God, in order to
become God.

When with Arabi the theme of an ode is “Through asceticism, fervent
yearning after God and patience in suffering, man becomes God or acquires
divine nature” (Horten, Myst., I, p. 16), then this goal is identical with
that of the alchemistic transmutation; the base metal acquires (after
purification, refining, etc.) by virtue of the tincturing with the
Philosopher’s Stone the nature of gold, i.e., the divine nature.

But patient effort is requisite. Precipitancy is as great an evil as
inactivity. It is, to use the language of the alchemists, just as bad to
scorch the tender blossoms by a forced and hasty fire (that in spite of
its intensity may be merely a straw fire), as to let go out the fire which
should be continuously kept alight, and to let grow cold the materia. The
process of distillation is to be accomplished slowly, so that the spirits
may not escape. That which rises as steam through the “heating” in the
“receptacle” (i.e., in man) is the soul rising into the higher regions.
Distilling like rain drops [destillare = drop down], it brings each time
to the thirsting materia a divine gain. But this process is not to be
overdone, for the thirsting earth must be gently instilled with the
heavenly moisture of the water of life: the process of “imbibition.”

The metallic subject must be gently dissolved in its own natural water
(conscience), not with powerful media, not with corroding acids, which the
foolish employ in order to reach the goal in a hurry, for by such means he
either spoils the materia or produces a merely superficial action.
Senseless asceticism and the like are just as objectionable as the
impetuous enthusiasm (which we called straw fire here). The ethical work
of alchemy as of common life is a sublimation; it is important that the
materia takes up at any time only as much as it can sublimate. We may also
conceive it in this way. The materia is to be moistened only with the
water that it can utilize after the solution has taken place (i.e., keep
in enduring form, absorb into their nature). Compare in this connection
the words of Count Bernhard von Trevis: “I tell you assuredly that no
water dissolves any metallic spices by a natural solution, save that which
abides with them in matter and form, and which the metals themselves,
being dissolved, can recongeal.” (H. A., pp. 189 ff.)

The passage “slowly and quite judiciously” of the Smaragdine tablet will
now be fully appreciated.

The desired completion or oneness should be a state of the soul, a
condition of being, not of knowing. The means that lead to it presuppose
in the neophyte something analogous to religious faith, and because the
conditions of the mastery appear to the neophyte to contradict nature or
each other, the mystical experiences that are derived from it are called
“supernatural.” The “supernatural” is, however, only an appearance, which
results when we conceive nature too narrowly, as when we see in her merely
the totality of bodies. If we mean by nature the possibility of life and
activity, then that which appears supernatural must be counted as nature.
The expressions natural and supernatural are but means of the thinking
judgment, they are preliminaries which have a certain justification but
only so long as they are an expression for a stage of knowledge. The
initially supernatural resolves itself in nature, or better, Nature is
raised to divinity. If the natural and the supernatural are symbolized,
the one being described as sulphur and the other as mercury, then the
disciples of philosophy, under the obligation to think things and not
merely names, are finally brought, during the process of search, to a
recognition of the inseparableness of both in a third something which may
be called sun; but as all three are recognized as inseparably one, the
termini can change places until finally an inner illumination takes place.
“Those that have never had this experience are apt to decry it as
imaginary, but those who enter into it know that they have entered into a
higher life, or feel themselves enabled to look upon things from a higher
point of view. To use what may seem to be a misapplication of language: it
is a supernatural birth, naturally entered upon.” (H. A., p. 229.) When
the alchemists speak of philosophical mercury and philosophical gold, they
mean something in man and something in God that finally turns out to be
the One. “By this symbolism the alchemists escape the difficulty of
treating the subject in ordinary language. The learner must always return
to nature and her possibilities for the sense of the derived symbols, and
to it the hermetic masters also continually direct him.” (H. A., pp. 232
ff.) If the true light has risen in the hearts of the seekers, kindled
from within (although apparently by a miracle from without) “the sulphur
and mercury become one, or are seen to be the same, differing only in a
certain relation; somewhat as the known and the unknown (and the conscious
and the unconscious) are but one, the unknown decreasing as the known
increases, and vice versa.” (H. A., p. 235.)

One alchemist teaches: “Consider well what it is you desire to produce,
and according to that regulate your intention. Take the last thing in your
intention as the first thing in your principles.... Attempt nothing out of
its own nature [then follow parables that grapes are not gathered from
thistles, etc.]. If you know how to apply this doctrine in your operation
as you ought, you will find great benefit, and a door will hereby be
opened to the discovery of greater mysteries.” Actually there is a greater
difference between one who seeks what he seeks as an end, and one who
seeks it as a means to an end. To seek knowledge for riches is a very
different thing from seeking riches (or independence) as an instrument of
knowledge. In the study in question the means and the end must coincide,
i.e., the truth must be sought for itself only. (H. A., p. 238.) In the
book, “De Manna Benedicto,” we read: “Whoever thou art that readest this
tractate, let me exhort thee that thou directest thy understanding and
soul more toward God for the keeping of his commandments, than toward love
of this art [sc. its external portions], for although it be the only,
indeed the whole wisdom of the world, it is yet powerless in comparison
with the divine wisdom of the soul, which is the love towards God, in the
keeping of his commandments.... Hast thou been covetous, profane one? Be
thou meek and pious and serve in all lowliness the glorious creator; if
thou art not determined to do that, thou art employed in trying to wash an
Ethiop white.”

Desire is, as some ancient philosophers think, the root of all affects,
which manifest themselves in pairs. Joy corresponds to desire fulfilled,
sorrow to the obstructed or imperiled fulfillment; hope is the expectation
of fulfillment, fear the opposite, etc. All the pairs of opposites are in
some degree superficial, something that comes and goes with time, while
the essential remains, itself invisible and without relation to time—a
perpetual activity, an ever enduring conation as it was formerly called.
(It is the libido of the psychoanalysis. In its manifestations it is
subjected to bipolarity, as Stekel has named the inevitable pairs of
opposites.)

The pairs of opposites have been noticed in the Hindu doctrine of
salvation exactly as in alchemy. Alchemistic hieroglyphics we know are
rich in [ambiguous] expressions for a hostile Dyas (couple), with whose
removal a better condition first commences, although at the outset it is
actually requisite for the achievement of the work. In the Bhagavad-Gita
the pairs of opposites play a great part. The world is full of agony on
account of the pairs of opposites, which are to be found everywhere. Heat,
cold; high, low; good, evil; joy, sorrow; poor, rich; young, old; etc. The
basis of the opposites is formed by the primal opposition Rajas-Tamas. To
escape from it in recognizing the true ego as superior to it and not
participating in it, is the foremost purpose of the effort toward
salvation. So whoever has raised himself above the qualities of substances
is described as having escaped from opposites.


    “Contact of atoms is only cold and warm, brings pleasure and pain,
    They come and go without permanency—tolerate them O Bharata.
    The wise man, whom these do not affect, O mighty hero,
    Who bears pain and pleasure with equanimity he is ripening for
                immortality.” (II, 14 ff.)


The spirit, the true ego, is raised above the agitation of the qualities
of nature:


    “Swords cut him not, fire burns him not,
    Water wets him not nor does the wind wither him.
    Not to be cut, not to burn, not to get wet, not to be withered,
    He is constant, above everything, continuous, eternal immovable.”
                [II 23 ff.]


This characterization sounds almost like the description of the mercury of
the philosophers, which is indestructible, a water that does not wet, a
fire that does not consume.

Hermes on the human soul: “The accidents residing in the material
substances have never sympathized with each other, but on the contrary
have always been in opposition and in mutual conflict. Guard thyself O
soul from them and turn away from them.... Thou O soul art of one nature,
but they are manifold; thou art but one with thyself; they are, however,
in conflict with each other. [Psychoanalytically regarded, to the soul is
here assigned the property which is desired but is not present, while that
which is undesired but actually present in the soul (inclination and
disinclination) is projected into the external world.] ... How long O soul
wilt thou yet be needy, and flee from every sensation to its opposite, now
from warmth to cold, now from cold to warmth, now from hunger to satiety,
now from satiety to hunger?” (Fleischer Herm. a. d. Seele, pp. 14 ff.) “Be
thou O soul regardful of the behavior in this world, yet not as a child
without understanding who when one gives him to eat and acts leniently
towards him is satisfied and cheerful, but when one treats him severely
cries and is bad, indeed begins to weep while laughing and when he is
satisfied begins again to be bad. This is not worthy of approbation but
rather a mongrel and blameworthy behavior. The world O soul, is so
organized as to unify exactly these opposites; good and evil, weal and
woe, distress and comfort, and contains types of ideas that have the
effect of waking the soul and making it aware of itself, so that as a
result it gains reason that illumines and consummates knowledge, i.e.,
wisdom and knowledge of the true nature of things. For this purpose alone
has the soul come into the world, to learn and experience; but it is like
a man that comes to a place to become acquainted with it and know its
conditions, but then gives up the learning, inquiring and collecting of
information, and diverts his spirit by reaching after luxury and the
enjoyment of other things, and in so doing forgets to acquire that which
he was to strive for.” (L. c., pp. 8 ff.)

I return to the psychological point of view of our friend Hitchcock:
“Desire and love are almost synonymous terms, for we love and seek what we
desire, and so also we desire and seek what we love; yet neither love nor
desire is by any necessary connection directed to one thing rather than
another, but either under conditions suitable to it may be directed to
anything. From which it follows that it is possible to make God as the
Eternal, its object, or call it truth and we may see that its enjoyment
must partake of its own nature. Now we read that it is not common for man
to love and pursue the good and the true because it is the good and true;
but we call that good which we desire and there lies the great mistake of
life. From all which we may see that vast consequences follow from the
choice of an object of desire, which as we have said, may as easily be an
eternal as a transient one. We should be on guard against a too mechanical
conception of these things. By so doing we should depart too greatly from
the point of view of the true alchemists. One author tells of the
significant advance that he made from the time when he discovered that
nature works ‘magically.’ ” (H. A., Hitchcock’s Remarks upon Alchemy, pp.
294 ff.)

Aversion and hate, the opposites of desire and love, are not independent
affections but depend upon the latter. There is only the one impulsion of
demand that strives for what satisfies it and repulses what conflicts with
it. “If then desire is turned to one only eternal thing, then, since the
nature of man takes its character from his leading or chief desire, the
whole man is gradually converted to, or, as some think, transmuted into
that one thing.” (H. A., pp. 295 ff.)

The doctrine naturally presupposes the possibility, already mentioned, of
a schooling of the will, yet it will still be necessary to fix it upon a
definite object. The love of the transitory finds itself deceived because
the objects vanish, while the desire itself, the conation (or in
psychoanalytic language the libido), continues forever. For this
everlasting desire only an everlasting object is suitable. An object of
that kind is not to be found in the external world. We can only withdraw
the outer object and offer ideals in exchange. The moment that this
withdrawal of external objects takes place the libido begins, as it were,
to eject itself as an object; in the ideal we give it a nucleus for this
process, in order that it may form the new object around it and water it
with its own life. So in a “magic” way a new world is formed whose laws
are those of the ideal. The formation of the new world (new earth and new
heaven, new Jerusalem, etc.) occurs frequently in the symbolic language of
mysticism.

The laws of the ideal and consequently of the new world are determined by
the nature of the ideal. Not every one is proved everlastingly suitable.


    “Those that dedicate themselves to the gods and fathers, pass over
                to the gods and fathers,
    Spirit worshipers to the spirits, whoever honors me, comes to me.”


says the Highest Being to Arjuna in the Bhagavad-Gita (IX, 25). The mystic
is in the position from the moment of regeneration, to create in himself a
new world with laws that he may, to a certain extent, himself select.
Fortunate is he who makes a good selection. Every one is the architect of
his own fortune. This is most true when after introversion the power of
self determining one’s own destiny is directed toward the most intensive
living. The formation and cultivation of the new earth is a beginning that
is rich with significant consequences. The alchemists speak of a maidenly
earth or a flaky white earth (i.e., crystalline) as a certain stage in the
work. This is probably the stage that we are examining now, the stage of
the new, still undeveloped earth that is now to be organized (according to
the conceived ideal). The soil is crystalline because the old earth was
dissolved and has been freshly formed from the solution. The
crystallization corresponds to regeneration. The “white earth” probably
corresponds to the “white stone,” which is the first stage of completion
after the blacks (first mystical death, putrefaction, trituration, or
contrition). In the white earth a seed is sown. We shall hear of it later.

If the work is not to make men unserviceable and is not again to bring
them into conflict with the demands of life, so that all the effort would
have been fruitless, the new world must be organized in such a way that it
is compatible with the demands of real life. In other words, the ideal
that regulates the new world must be an ethical one. The mystic who wishes
to be freed from contradictions will have to follow his conscience as a
guide, and not the unexplored but the explored conscience. He cannot
escape it in the long run (the magicians that defy it are, as the legend
informs us, finally torn to pieces by the devil); it is better for him to
get upon its side and so turn the conflict in his favor. It appears that
this manly attitude would have a marvelous inner concord as a result and
outwardly, a remarkable firmness of character. It is not my object to
decide what metaphysical significance the strengthening through mysticism
of the ideal (God in me) may have.

“Take, O soul, not the unworthy and common as a model, for such use and
word will adhere to thee finally as a nature opposed to thine own. By this
means, however, the strong impulse itself towards union with thy nature
and to the return into thy home goes astray. Know that the exalted and
majestic Originator of things, is himself the noblest of all things. Take
then the noble things as a model, in order by that means to get nearer thy
Creator on the path of elective affinity. And know that the noble attaches
itself to the noble and the vulgar to the common.” (Fleischer, Herm. a. d.
Seele, p. 18.)

What is to be sown in the new earth is generally called love. A crop of
love is to arise; with love will the new world be saturated; its laws will
be the laws of love. By love a transmutation of the subject is to take
place. One alchemist (quoted in H. A., pp. 133 ff.) writes as follows:

“I find the nature of Divine Love to be a perfect unity and simplicity.
There is nothing more one, undivided, simple, pure, unmixed and
uncompounded than Love....

“In the second place I find Love to be the most perfect and absolute
liberty. Nothing can move Love, but Love; nothing touch Love, but Love;
nor nothing constrain Love, but Love. It is free from all things; itself
only gives laws to itself, and those laws are the laws of Liberty; for
nothing acts more freely than Love, because it always acts from itself,
and is moved by itself, by which prerogatives Love shows itself to be
allied to the Divine Nature, yea, to be God himself.

“Thirdly, Love is all strength and power. Make a diligent search through
Heaven and Earth, and you will find nothing so powerful as Love. What is
stronger than Hell and Death? Yet Love is the triumphant conqueror of
both. What more formidable than the wrath of God? Yet Love overcomes it,
and dissolves and changes it into itself. In a word, nothing can withstand
the prevailing strength of Love: it is the strength of Mount Zion, which
can never be moved.

“In the fourth place: Love is of a transmuting and transforming nature.
The great effect of Love is to turn all things into its own nature, which
is all goodness, sweetness, and perfection. This is that Divine power
which turns water into wine; sorrow and anguish into exulting and
triumphant joy; and curses into blessings. Where it meets with a barren
and heathy desert, it transmutes it into a paradise of delights; yea, it
changeth evil into good, and all imperfection into perfection. It restores
that which is fallen and degenerated to its primary beauty, excellence and
perfection. It is the Divine Stone, the White Stone with the name written
upon it, which no one knows but he that hath it. [Cf. Rev. II, 17. ‘He
that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches; To
him that overcometh will I give to eat [nutritio] of the hidden manna, and
will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no
man knoweth saving he that receiveth it.’ Also III, 12: ‘Him that
overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go
no more out: and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of
the city of my God, which is new Jerusalem, which cometh down out of
heaven from my God: and I will write upon him my new name.’ Cf. also XIX,
12, and XXI, 2. The White Stone with the new name is also joined with the
new earth. Because of this it is important that the new Jerusalem is
‘prepared as a bride adorned for her husband.’] In a word, it is the
Divine Nature, it is God himself, whose essential property it is to
assimilate all things with himself; or [if you will have it in the
scripture phrase] to reconcile all things to himself, whether they be in
Heaven or in Earth; and all by means of this Divine Elixir, whose
transforming power and efficacy nothing can withstand....” (H. A., pp. 133
ff.)

At the end of the work there ensues the union of sun and moon, typifying
God and man. As in the Vedanta the teaching of the holy books of India,
the Upanishads, so in alchemy, the difference between the one soul and the
All Soul is of no importance. For every one who succeeds in overcoming the
fundamental error, in which we are all implicated, the difference
vanishes, and the two things previously separated coalesce. In reality
there is only the one thing: God.

Irenæus writes: “... The fire of nature assimilates all that it nourishes
to its own likeness, and then our mercury or menstruum vanishes, that is,
it is swallowed by the solar nature [The soul of man dissolves and is
taken up by the divine or All Soul] and all together make but one
universal mercury [All Soul] by intimate union. And this mercury is the
material principle of the Stone; for formerly, when it was compounded of
three mercuries, [namely, when they thought they had to distinguish
spirit, soul and body, or some other division in it] then Soul, world and
God were, for example, to be thought of, or as they are called in
Soeta-svatara-Upanishad V, Enjoyer, Object of Enjoyment, and Inciter.


    As eternal cause contains that trinity.
    Whoever finds in it the Brahma as the kernel,
    Resolves himself in it as a goal, and is freed from birth.”


Cf. also Deussen, Syst. d. Ved., p. 232, and Sutr. d. Ved., pp. 541 ff.:
“Frequently we are told of the connection of the highest with the
individual soul, and then again of a splitting up [conditioned by them]
inside the Brahma, by virtue of which their two parts are mutually opposed
and limited. Both of these things happen, however, only from the
standpoint of the distinctions [upadhi].... There were two which were
superficial (in that they formed an unjustified opposition) and the third
essential to Sol and Luna only, not to the Stone; for nature would produce
these two out of it by artificial decoction.... [These distinctions depend
on ignorance, after throwing off which the individual is one with the
highest. The connection of the individual soul with Brahman is in truth
its entering into its own self, and the division in Brahma is as unreal as
that between space in general and space within the body.] But when the two
perfect bodies are dissolved [prepared for the mystical work] they are
transmuted with the mercury that dissolved them, and then there is no more
repugnancy in it; then there is no longer a distinction between
superficial and essential. And this is that one matter of the stone, that
one thing which is the subject of all wonders. When thou art come to this
then shalt thou no more discern a distinction between the Dissolver [God]
and the dissolved [soul] ... and the color of the ripe sulphur [the divine
nature] inseparably united to it will tinge your water [soul].” Irenæus
says that the two bodies, Sol and Luna, are compared by the alchemists to
two mountains, first because they are found in mountains, and second by
way of opposition: “For where mountains are highest above ground, there
they lie deepest underground,” and he adds: “The name is not of so much
consequence, take the body which is gold [i.e., here the consummate man]
and throw it into mercury, such a mercury as is bottomless [infinite],
that is, whose center it can never find but by discovering its own.” (H.
A., 283 ff.)

In reference to these and similar expressions of the alchemists, Hitchcock
rightly calls our attention to Plotinus, who writes, for example (Enn.,
VI, 9, 10): “We must comprehend God with our whole being, so that we no
longer have in us a single part that is not dependent upon God. Then we
may see him and ourselves as it beseems us to see, in radiant beams,
filled with spiritual light, or rather as pure light itself [notice this
fullness of light] without weight, imponderable, become God or rather
being God. Our life’s flame is then kindled; but if we sink down into the
world of sense, it is as if extinguished.... Whoever has thus seen himself
will, then, when he looks, see himself as one who has become unified, or
rather he will be united to himself as such a one and feel himself as
such. Possibly one should not in this case speak of seeing. But as regards
the seen, if we can indeed distinguish the seeing and the seen, and not
rather have to describe both as one, which is, to be sure, a bold
statement, then the seeing really does not see in this condition, nor does
he differentiate two things, nor has he the idea of two things. He is, as
it were, another; he ceases to be himself, he belongs no longer to
himself; arriving there, he has ascended unto God and has become one with
him, as a center that coincides with another center; the two coinciding
things are here one, and only two when they are separated. In this sense
we speak of the soul’s being another than God.”

I recall also the passage in Amor Proximi where it is said that the earth
will again be placed in Solis punctum. The center of the sun [God] is to
be seen in the symbol [Symbol: Gold]. We now understand the mystical
difference between the hieroglyphs [Symbol: Gold] and [Symbol: Alum],
between gold and alum. In order to express in the mercury symbol [Symbol:
Mercury] the accomplished union (represented by +) of [Symbol: Gold] and
[Symbol: Silver], which takes place through the newly discovered central
point, the symbol [Symbol: Mercury] is also used.

I have mentioned the vedantic teachings, whose agreement with alchemy has
also been noticed by Hitchcock. It takes emphatically the point of view of
the “non-existence of a second.” Multiplicity is appearance; the
difference between the individual soul and the All Soul depends upon an
error which we can overcome. The goal of salvation is the ascent into the
universal spirit Brahma (in the nirvana of the Buddhists there is the same
thought). Whoever has entered into the highest spirit, there is no longer
any “other” for him. Brhadaranyaka-Upanishad, IV, 3: (23) “If he does not
then [The man in the deep sleep (susupti),] see, he is yet seeing although
he sees not, for there is no interruption of vision for the seeing,
because he is imperishable; but there is no second beside him, no other
different from him that he could see. (24.) If he does not smell, he is
yet smelling although he smells not, for there is for the smelling
[person] no interruption of smelling because he is imperishable; but there
is no second thing beside him, no other thing different from him that he
could smell.... (32.) He stands like water [i.e., so pure] seer alone and
without a second ... he whose world is Brahm. This is his highest goal,
this is his highest fortune, this is his highest world, this is his
highest joy; through a minute particle of only this joy the other
creatures have their life.”

If I compare the hermetic teachings on the one hand with the vedanta, and
on the other with the Samkhya-Yoga, I do not lose sight of the fundamental
antagonism of both—Vedanta is monistic, Samkhya is dualistic—but in
appreciation of the doctrine of salvation which is common to both. That
the mystic finds the same germ in both systems is shown by the
Bhagavad-Gita. For him the theoretical difference is trivial, whether the
materia is dissolved as mere illusion, when he has attained his mystic
goal, or whether, as an eternal substance, it is as something overcome,
simply withdrawn, never more to be seen. According to the Samkhya
doctrine, too, the saved soul enters into its own being, and every
connection with objects of knowledge ceases.

In Yogavasistha it is written: “So serene as would the light appear if all
that is illumined, i.e., space, earth, ether, did not exist, such is the
isolated state of the seer, of the pure self, when the threefold world,
you and I, in brief, all that is visible, is gone. As the state of a
mirror is, in which no reflection falls, neither of statues nor of
anything else—only representing in itself the being [of the mirror]—such
is the isolation of the seer, who remains without seeing, after the jumble
of phenomena, I, you, the world, etc., has vanished.” (Garbe,
Samkhya-Phil., p. 326.)

In the materia (prakri) of the Samkhya system reside the three qualities
or constituents already familiar to us, Rajas, Tamas, and Sattva. Whoever
unmasks these as the play of qualities, raises himself above the world
impulses. For him, as he is freed from antagonisms, the play ceases. When
a soul is satiated with the activity of matter and turns away from it with
disdain, then matter ceases its activity for this soul with the thought,
“I am discovered.” It has performed what it was destined to perform, and
withdraws from the soul that has attained the highest goal, as a dancing
girl stops dancing when she has performed her task and the spectators have
enough. But in one respect matter is unlike the dancing girl or actress;
for while they repeat their performance at request, matter “is tenderly
disposed like a woman of good family,” who, if she is seen by a man,
modestly does not display herself again to his view. This last simile is
facilitated in the original texts by the fact that the Sanskrit for soul
and man has the same phonetic notation (pums, purusa). (Garbe, l. c., pp.
165 ff.)

In comparing the common mystic content of Vedanta and Samkhya-Yoga with
alchemy, I avoid the difficulty involved in establishing a detailed
concordance of the hermetic philosophy with one or another system. An
inquiry into this topic would result differently according to which
hermetic authors we should particularly consider.

It is probably worthy of notice that the Yoga-Mystics, like the
alchemists, are acquainted with the idea of the union of the sun and the
moon. Two breath or life currents are to be united, one of which
corresponds to the sun, the other to the moon. The expression Hathayoga
(where hatha = mighty effort. Cf. Garbe, Samkhya and Yoga, p. 43) will
also be interpreted so that Ha = sun, tha = moon, their union = the yoga
leading to salvation. (Cf. Hatha-Yoga-Prad., p. 1.)

The union of two things, the sun with the moon, the soul with God, the
seer with the seen, etc., is also taught by the image of the connection of
man and woman. That is the mystic marriage (Hieros gamos), a universally
widespread symbol of quite supreme importance. In alchemy the last
process, i.e., according to the viewpoint of representation, the
tincturing or the unification, is quite frequently represented in the
guise of a marriage—sometimes of a king and a queen. We cannot interchange
this final process with the initial one of introversion, which (as a
seeking for the uterus for the purpose of a rebirth) is likewise readily
conceived of as a sexual union. If the symbol of coitus was conceivable
there, so here, too, the same symbol is appropriate for the representation
of the definite union with the object longed for.

It is quite suggestive to associate the anagogic idea of the _Unio
mystica_, precisely on account of the erotic allegory, with the primal
motive of sexual union (with the mother) instead of with the wish to die,
as I have done at another place. It may be that the primal erotic power
supplies something for the accomplishment of this last purpose; it may be
that all powers must coöperate. If I now still abide by my original
exposition, this happens because it appears to me that the symbolism
emphasizes the going over of the one into the other more than the
attainment of the sexual goal; and even in the cases where the unio
mystica is described as a sexual union. We should not forget that the
sexual gratification is to be regarded also as a kind of annihilation. It
is a condition of intoxication and of oblivion or perishing. It is this
side of the sexual procedure that the symbolism of the unio mystica
particularly emphasizes.

Brhadaranyaka-Upanisad, IV, 3, 21: “... For even as one embraced by a
beloved woman has no consciousness of what is within or without, so the
spirit, embraced by the most percipient self (prajena almana, i.e., the
Brahm), has no knowledge of that which is external or internal. That is
its form of existence, in which it is characterized by stilled desire,
even its own desire is without desire and separated from sorrow.” This
passage treats of the deep sleep (susupti) which is regarded as a passing
union with the highest spirit, and so, as essentially the same as the
definitive _unificatio_. Sleep is the brother of death. Susupti is,
furthermore, conceived only as a preliminary; a German mystic would call
it a foretaste of the definitive ascent into Brahm.

In the parable the unio mystica appears twice represented, once in that
the king and queen are represented as the bridal couple, and the second
time when the king, i.e., God, takes the wanderer up into his kingdom.

The attainment of an inner harmony, of a serene peace, is what, as it
seems to me, is most clearly brought out as the characteristic of the
final unificatio—not merely by the Hindus or Neoplatonists, but also by
the Christian mystics and by the alchemists.

Artephius is quoted by H. A., p. 86, as follows: “... This water [water of
life] causes the dead body to vegetate, increase and spring forth, and to
rise from death to life by being dissolved first, and then sublimed. And
in doing this the body is converted into a spirit, and the spirit
afterwards into a body; and then is effected the amity, the peace, the
concord and the union of the contraries.”

Similarly Ripley (H. A., p. 245): “This is the highest perfection to which
any sublunary body can be brought, by which we know that God is one, for
God is perfection; to which, whenever any creature arrives in its kind
[according to its nature], it rejoiceth in unity, in which there is no
division nor alterity, but peace and rest without contention.”

The final character of the completed philosopher’s stone makes it
conceivable, that, as the hermetic masters say, it is made only once by a
man and then not again. The Stone is an absolutely imperishable Good; but
if it should be lost it is surely not the right stone.

I have now to offer some conjectures regarding further interpretations of
the two and the three principles [Symbol: Gold] and [Symbol: Silver],
namely [Symbol: Sulfur] [Symbol: Mercury] [Symbol: Salt]. We are aware of
a general difference. I add now first the remark of Hitchcock that the
“two” things are to be regarded as an antithesis: _natura naturans_ and
_natura naturata_. We might intellectually conceive the [Symbol: Mercury]
(mercury) given by many writers at the beginning of the work as a double
one, on the one hand as nature and on the other as our world picture. We
cause it to work on our [Symbol: Sulphur] (sulphur), i.e., on our
affectivity by which the [Symbol: Sulphur] is purified and dissolved, for
it is compelled to adapt itself to the requirements of the world laws. But
by this means a new world picture is produced, for the former had been
influenced by the unclarified [Symbol: Sulphur]; our affective life limits
our intellectual. The new world picture or the newly gained [Symbol:
Mercury] we combine with our [Symbol: Sulfur] and so on, until finally
after a gradual clarification nature and our world picture harmonize. Then
there are no longer two mercuries but only one; and the sulphur, our
completed subject, has become more or less a unity. Now we may advance to
the unification of the two clarified things, which in this stage are
called [Symbol: Gold] and [Symbol: Silver]. Now subject and object are
bound together and man enters, as is so wonderfully expressed in
Chandogya-Upanisad, VIII, 13, as a being adapted into the unadapted
(uncreated-primordial) world of Brahma. [Symbol: Sol] and [Symbol: Luna]
may, to be sure, be conceived also as the love of God towards man and the
love of man towards God. The different masters of the art are the same in
different ways in that the one sees more the intellectual, the other the
emotional. They describe different sides or aspects of the same process,
for which we do not indeed possess appropriate concepts, and whose best
form of expression is through symbols. The sign [Symbol: Sol] is then
neither = subject nor love but just = [Symbol: Sol], i.e., a thing to
which we may approximate nearest by a form of integration of all partial
meanings. In view of the fact that [Symbol: Sulfur] and [Symbol: Mercury]
are contrasted at the beginning of the process also as body and soul, we
can, by making [Symbol: Sulfur] = passions and [Symbol: Mercury] =
knowledge (reason) conceive the rest thus: [Symbol: Sulfur] is to be
purified by an exalted [Symbol: Mercury] (in distinction from the common
[Symbol: Mercury], called also “our” [Symbol: Mercury]), and so to be
purified by a higher knowledge. From [Symbol: Sulfur] is developed (i.e.,
it unmasks itself to the initiated as) [Symbol: Luna], i.e., Maya, the
object, that in its difference from the subject is mere illusion; and from
[Symbol: Mercury] comes [Symbol: Sol], the Brahm or subject, and now the
_unio mystica_ can take place. Another use of symbolism is the one by
which we are able to concoct gold out of sulphur; from the affects we
derive, through purification, love (toward God). The spirit [Symbol:
Mercury] exalts [raises] the antithesis [Symbol: Sol] and [Symbol: Luna]
(soul and body) in such a way that finally it simply opposes itself as
subject and object. (Cf. H. A., pp. 143 ff.)

Sometimes the making of gold is described as an amalgamation; from the raw
material, [Symbol: Sol] is derived by an amalgamation with [Symbol:
Mercury] [quicksilver]. That naturally signifies the search for the Atman
or highest spirit in man by means of contemplation, which belongs to
[Symbol: Mercury], the [act of] knowing.

With regard to the trinity [Symbol: Sol] [Symbol: Luna] [Symbol: Mercury]:
The solar divinity [creating, impregnating] in man is [Symbol: Sulfur]
that by its triangle moreover marks the fiery nature [Symbol: Sulfur];
that which is comprised in the bodily nature, the terrestrial is [Symbol:
Salt] salt, which is also represented as a cube, like the element earth.
The two can be called [Symbol: Sol], anima, and [Symbol: Luna], corpus.
The celestial messenger who appears as a mediator for the antithesis is
the conscience [Symbol: Mercury], who has his constant influx from God,
the real [Symbol: Sol], and is therefore a divine spirit. We have then the
triad Spiritus, anima, corpus [[Symbol: Mercury] [Symbol: Sol] [Symbol:
Luna]] or, because [Symbol: Mercury] is to be regarded as a mediator,
[Symbol: Sol] [Symbol: Mercury] [Symbol: Luna]. The intervention of the
[Symbol: Mercury] effects the previously mentioned exaltation of [Symbol:
Sol] and [Symbol: Luna] or of [Symbol: Sulfur] and [Symbol: Mercury]
(crude state) to [Symbol: Sol] and [Symbol: Luna].

In view of the difficulty of the mystic work that attempts to accomplish a
sheerly superhuman task, it is not surprising that it cannot be finished
in one attempt but requires time. It necessitates great persistence. In
the life of the mystic the states of love and aspiration for God alternate
with those of spiritual helplessness and barrenness. (Horten, Myst., I, p.
9.)

Arabi sings in his ode on man’s becoming godlike: “[1] O thou ancient
temple. A light has arisen for thee (you) that gleams in our hearts. [2]
To thee I lament the wilderness that I have traversed, and in which I have
poured forth an unlimited flood of tears. [3] Neither at dawn nor at dusk
do I get repose. From morning until evening I fare on my way without
ceasing. [4] The camels go forth on their journey at night; even if they
have injured their feet, they still hasten. [5] These (mighty) riding
camels bore us to you (probably God) with passionate longing, although
they did not hope to attain the goal....” The riding camels signify the
longing of the mystics for God. “It seeks and strives ceaselessly,
although its powers are drained by the difficulties of the search.”
(Horten, l. c., p. 16 ff.)

Many degrees or stations are to be gone over on the difficult way, yet
zeal is to abide constant in all circumstances. [The idea of the ladder
set up to heaven, of steps, etc., is universal in religions.] In general
seven such steps are distinguished. In Khunrath, e.g., the citadel of
Pallas has seven steps. Paracelsus (De Natura Rerum, VIII), following a
favorite custom, gives seven operations of the work. “... It is now
necessary to know the degrees and steps to transmutation, and how many
they are. These steps are then no more than seven. Although some count
still more, it should not be so. For the most important steps are seven.
The further ones, however, which might be reckoned as steps are comprised
under the others, which are as follows: calcination [sublimation],
dissolution, putrefaction, distillation, coagulation, and tincturing.
Whoever passes over these seven steps and degrees comes to such a
marvelous place, where he sees much mystery and attains the transmutation
of all natural things.” In the “Rosarium” of Johannes Daustenius [Chap.
XVII] the seven steps are represented as follows: “And then the corpus [1]
is a cause that the water is retained. The water [2] is the cause of
preserving the oil so that it is not ignited on the fire, and the oil [3]
is the cause of retaining the tincture, and the tincture [4] is a cause of
the colors appearing, and the color [5] is a cause of showing the white,
and the white [6] is a cause of keeping every volatile thing [7] from
being no longer volatile.” It amounts to the same thing when Bonaventura
describes septem gradus contemplationis [seven steps of contemplation],
and David of Augsburg [13th century] the “seven steps of prayer.” Boehme
recognizes 7 fountain spirits that constitute a certain gradation and in
the yoga we also find 7 steps, which are described in the “Yoga Vasistha”
(cf. Hath. Prad., pp. 2 ff). It may easily happen that the domination of
the number 7 is to be derived from the infusion of the scientific
doctrines (7 planets, 7 metals, 7 tones in the diatonic scale) and yet it
may depend on an actual correspondence in the human psyche with nature—who
can tell? Most significant is the connection of the 7 steps of development
with the infusion of the nature myth in the alchemistic theories of
“rotations.” For the perfection of the Stone, rotations (i.e., cycles) are
required by many authors, in which the materia (and so the soul) pass
through the spheres of all the planets. They have to be subjected
successively to the domination (the regimen) of all seven planets. This is
related to the ideas of those neoplatonists and gnostics according to
which the soul must, on its way (anodos) to its heavenly home, i.e., to
its celestial goal, pass through all the planetary spheres and through the
animal cycle. (Cf. Bousset, Hauptpr. d. G., pp. 11 and 321.) I observe,
moreover, a thoroughly vivid representation of this very theme in the good
old Mosheim, Ketzergesch., p. 89 ff. Also in the life of the world, if it
is completely lived, man passes through, according to the ideas of the old
mystery teachings, the domination of the seven planets.

The anagogic meaning of rotation may be that of a collection of all
available (seven in number) powers, in order finally to rise as a whole,
to God.

More important, or at any rate more easily comprehensible, appears to me
the trichotomy necessarily resulting from the course of the mystical work,
a triplicate division that results in the three main phases, black, white,
and red. The black corresponds to introversion and to the first [mystic]
death, the white to the “new earth,” to freedom or innocence, red to love,
which completes the work. This general arrangement does not prevent the
symbols from being often confused by the alchemistic authors. There are
gradations between the main colors, all kinds of color play; in particular
the so-called peacock’s tail appears, which comes before the stable white
to indicate the characteristic gayness of color of visionary experiences,
and which marks the stage of introversion.

If one put into the center of vision, as goal of the work, the recovery of
the harmonious state of the soul, one might express oneself about the
three primary colors as follows: The paradisical state demands absolute
freedom from conflict. We can attain this only by completely withdrawing
from the external world whatever causes conflict in connection with the
external world, so that there comes to pass with regard to it, a
thorough-going indifference. This indifference is the black. The freedom
from conflict (guiltlessness) in the now newly beginning life is the
white. Previously, at the disintegration (rotting) of the material, one
constituent part was removed and taken away. That is, the libido becomes
free (love). It is gradually alloyed with the white material, which is dry
(thirsty without thirst); sown in the white ground. Life is without
conflict now drenched with love, red. This true red thus attained is
permanent because it is produced [in contrast to mere instruction] from
the heart of hearts, the roots of innermost feeling, which is subjected to
no usury.

The mystical procedure can be realized in different degrees of intensity.
The lowest degree is as a program with the mere result of a stimulation;
the highest degree is a final transmutation of the psyche. If this goal is
attained in life, we have acquired the terrestrial stone. In contrast, the
celestial stone belongs with the eschatological concepts and the celestial
tincture is the apokatastasis.

It is an interesting question whether the resolution of conflicts, with
evasion of the process in the outer world, cannot be accomplished
subjectively, by battles with symbols (personifications) and in symbols,
thus amounting to an abbreviation of the process. Theoretically this is
not impossible, for the conflicts do not indeed lie in the external world,
but in our emotional disposition towards it; if we change this disposition
by an inner development, the external world has a different value for the
libido.

“The projection into the cosmic is the primal privilege of the libido, for
it naturally enters into our perception through the gates of all the
senses and apparently from without, and actually, in the form of the
pleasure and pain qualities of perception. These, as we all know, we
attribute without further deliberation to the object, and their cause, in
spite of philosophical deliberation, we are continually inclined to look
for in the object, while the object is often hopelessly innocent of it.”
(Jung, in Jb. ps. F., III, p. 222; with which compare the Freudian
transference concept and Ferenczi’s essay on “Introjektion und
Ubertragung,” in Jb. ps. F., I, p. 422.) Jung calls attention to the
frequently described immediate projection of the libido in love poetry, as
in the following example from the Edda (H. Gering):


    “In Gymer’s Courtyard I saw walking
    The maiden, dear to me;
    From the brightness of her arms glowed the heavens,
    And all the eternal sea.”


The mystic looks for the conflicts that he desires to do away with, in
man, the place where they really exist. With this theoretical presumption
the possible objection against all mysticism is averted, namely that it is
valueless because it rests merely upon imagined experiences, upon
fanaticism. This objection, though not to be overlooked, does not apply to
mysticism, which accomplishes an actual ethical work of enduring value—but
to the other path that issues from introversion, namely magic (not to
mention physical and spiritual suicide). This is nicely expressed, too, in
an allegorical way by saying that magically-made gold melts, as the story
goes, or turns into mud (i.e., the pretended value vanishes in the face of
actuality) while “our” alchemistic gold is an everlasting good. The yoga
doctrine, too, describes Siddhi (those imaginary wonders in which the
visionary loses himself) as transitory, only salvation alone, i.e., the
mystical goal being imperishable.

As for the metaphysical import of the mystical doctrine, I might maintain
that the psychoanalytic unmasking of the impelling powers cannot prejudice
its value. I do not venture at all upon this valuation; but for the very
purpose of bringing into prominence a separate philosophical problem, I
must emphatically declare that if psychoanalysis makes it conceivable that
we men, impelled by this and that “titanic” primal power, are necessitated
to hit upon this or that idea, then even if it is made clear what causes
us to light upon it, still nothing is as yet settled as to the value for
knowledge of the thing discovered.

I am so far from wishing to derive a critique of the metaphysical import
of the doctrine from psychoanalytic grounds alone, that I felt called upon
to make claim only to a synthesis for the merely psychological
understanding of mystic symbolism, a synthesis which I have attempted to
block out as well as I was able in the present Part III of my book.

 
