
## [HOME](scrolls/home)

# III-III
 
     Section III.


The Royal Art.


It has been mentioned that the work of perfecting mankind might be
realized in different degrees of intensity, which might extend from
complete living realization to mere sympathy without any clear
comprehension. The psychic types in which the realization is achieved are,
it may be said, identical.

These typical groups of symbols that the mystic [I draw a certain
distinction between the mystes and the mystic. The latter is a mystes who
makes a system of what he has realized.] produces as a functional
expression of his subjective transformation, can be thought of as an
educational method applied to arouse the same reactions in other men. In
the group of symbols are contained more or less clearly the already
mentioned elementary types as they are common to all men; they strike the
same chords in all men. Symbolism is for this very reason the most
universal language that can be conceived. It is also the only language
that is adapted to the various degrees of intensity as well as to the
different levels of the intro-determination of living experience without
requiring therefore a different means of expression; for what it contains
and works with are the elementary types themselves [or symbols which are
as adequate as possible to them] which, as we have seen, represent a
permanent element in the stream of change. This series of symbols is quite
as useful to the neophyte as to the one who is near to perfection; every
one will find in the symbols something that touches him closely; and what
must be particularly emphasized is that the individual at every spiritual
advance that he makes, will always find something new in the symbols
already familiar to him, and therefore something to learn. To be sure,
this new revelation is founded in himself; but there results for the
uncritical mind (mythological level) the illusion that the symbols (e.g.,
those of the holy scripture) are endowed with a miraculous power which
implies a divine revelation. [Cf. the concept of the origin of the symbol
in my essay, Phant. u. Myth.] Because of a similar illusion, e.g.,
Jamblichus posits demons between gods and men, who make comprehensible to
the latter the utterances of the gods; the demons, he thinks, are servants
of the gods and execute their will. They make visible to men in works and
words the invisible and inexpressible things of the gods; the formless
they reveal in forms and they reveal in concepts what transcends all
concepts. From the gods they receive all the good of which they are
capable, partially or according to their nature, and share it again with
the races that stand below them.

I said above, every one will find something appropriate to himself in the
symbols, and I emphasized the great constancy of the types fast rooted in
the unconscious, types which impart to them a universal validity. The
divine is revealed “only objectively different according to the
disposition of the vessel into which it falls, to one one way, another to
another. To the rich poetical genius it is revealed preeminently in the
activity of his imagination; to the philosophical understanding as the
scheme of a harmonious system. It sinks into the depths of the soul of the
religious, and exalts the strong constructive will like a divine power.
And so the divine is honored differently by each one.” (Ennemoser, Gesch.
d. M., p. 109.) “The spiritual element of the inheritance handed down by
our fathers works out vigorously in the once for all established style....
On the dark background of the soul stand, as it were, the magic symbols in
definite types, and it requires but an inner or outer touch [E.g., by
religious observances.] to make them kindle and become active.” (Ib., p.
274.) “The unconscious is common to all mankind in an infinitely greater
degree than the content of the individual consciousness, for it is the
condensation of the historically average and oft-repeated.” (Jung, Jb. ps.
F., III, pp. 169 ff.)

Whoever allows the educative symbols to work upon him, whether he sees
only darkly the ethical applications typified in them, or clearly
perceives them, or completely realizes them in himself, in any case he
will be able to enjoy a satisfying sense of purification for his earnest
endeavor in an ethical direction. The just mentioned dim perception
(probably the most frequent case), does not exclude the existence of very
clear ideas in consciousness; the person in question generally considers
his ideas, although they are only masks in front of the absolute ideal, as
the ultimate sense of the symbol, thus accepting one degree of
significance for the complete meaning. Every one approximates the ideal as
he can; the absolute ideal through his ephemeral, but attainable ideal.
The highest being speaks in the inexhaustible Bhagavad-Gita:


    “More trouble have they who devote themselves to the invisible;
    By physical beings the invisible goal is attained only with
                difficulty.
    [XII, 5.]

    God is the all. Hard is it to find the noble man who recognizes
                this.
    Those whom greed robs of knowledge go to other gods,
    Cleave to many rulers—their own nature rules them,
    And whatsoever divinity one strives to honor in belief,
    I respect his belief and direct him to the right place.
    If he strives in firm belief towards his divinity’s favor and
                grace,
    Then shall he in part get what he wants, for I gladly put good in
                his way.
    Yet the result is but limited in the case of those of limited
                sensibility.
    He finds the gods who honors them. Who honors me, attains to me.”
    [VII, 19-23.]


If above I derived the instructive group of symbols from a mystic, that is
not to say that it must be precisely so. I brought out this case among
possible cases only for the reason that the mystic is the one who carries
out most strenuously the ethical work of purification, and under such
conditions as are most favorable to a suggestive group of symbols, and in
particular those rich in characteristic types. Bear in mind the founders
of religion. (They do not always have to be individuals—schools, myths.)
There are, however, others than the religiously inspired natures, who are
preëminently endowed to produce suggestive symbol groups with anagogic
value; the artists. I suspect that it would prove that the purifying
(cathartic) action of a work of art is the greater the more strongly the
anagogic symbolism (the groups of types that carry it) is developed, or in
other words, the more they express a tendency to a broadening of the
personality. This tendency, to which belong the motives of the denial of
the selfish will (father figure) of the love that is connected with
sacrifice (incest motive, regeneration) of the devotion to an ideal
(longing for death), etc., is manifested in the artist as also in the
devout observer of the work of art in his very devotion to it. Being lost
in a work of art appears to me essentially related both to introversion
and to the unio mystica.

I have already spoken of the creations of the myth forming imagination and
its anagogic import. In alchemy, to which I wish now to return, the
mythical and the individual images meet in the most vivid way, without
destroying each other.

In regard to the high ethical aspirations of alchemy, we understand that
as a mystic art it preserves those attributes of a royal art which it
seems to have had at first merely as gold making and magic. In fact what
art may more justly be called royal than that of the perfection of
mankind, that art which turns the dependent into the independent, the
slave into a master? The freeing of the will in the mystic (and in every
ethical) process has already, I believe, been commented on enough to be
comprehensible. And the power of rule that has been extolled as a magical
effect of the Philosopher’s Stone lies in the harmonizing of the
individual will with that of the world or with God’s will. In the new
birth—so remarks Jane Leade casually—we acquire a magic power; this occurs
“through faith, that is, through the harmony of our will with the divine
will. For faith puts the world in our power, inasmuch as the harmony of
our will with the divine has the result of making everything ours or
obedient to us. The will of the soul, when it accords wholly with the
divine, is no longer a naked will lacking its raiment, power, but brings
with it an invincible omnipotence.”

To-day, too, there is a royal art. Freemasonry bears this name. Not only
the name but its ethical ideal connects it with the spirit of the old
alchemy. This statement will probably be contradicted and meet the same
denial as did once the ideas of Kernning [J. Krebs], although I think I am
on different ground from that of this poetic but, in my eyes, all too
uncritical author. Keep in mind the historical treatment mentioned in Part
I, Section 4, and furthermore do not forget the psychological basis of our
present modes of viewing things.

[If I wished to compare the ethical aims of both in general terms, I
should run the risk of unduly expatiating on what is easily understood.
Robert Fischer describes freemasonry as a society of men who have set
themselves the severe task of a wise life and labor as the most difficult
task, of self-knowledge, self-mastery and self-improvement,—tasks that are
not finished in this life but only through death prepare us for the stage
where the true consummation begins. These beautiful and straightforward
words could just as well stand in an alchemistic discussion on the
terrestrial and celestial. But this will suffice.]

And now permit me to present the following portrayals by Jane Leade
[English mystic of the 17th century. She belonged to the philadelphian
society founded by Pordage.] which I reproduce here with a few words of
comment, and take them as an illustration of the beautiful spiritual union
of the serious hermetic with the new royal art. The reader can draw his
own conclusions. The passages are taken from Leade’s “Garten-Brunn” (L. G.
B.). References to Wirth are to the “Symbolisme Hermétique” (W. S. H.) of
this modern author.

This mystic who is sunk in deep meditation on the noble Stone of divine
Wisdom, has a vision of Sophia (Wisdom) at which she is startled. “Soon
came the voice and said: Behold I am God’s everlasting handmaid of wisdom,
whom thou hast sought. I am now here to unseal for thee the treasures of
the deepest wisdom of God, and to be to thee even that which Rebecca was
to her son Jacob, namely, a true, natural mother. For from my body and
womb shalt thou be born, conceived and reborn.” (L. G. B., I, p. 14.)

Leade is much rejoiced that the “morning star from on high” has sought
her, and secludes herself for the following days to await further
developments. She has still more visions of the crowned queen of heaven
and was asked whether she had the desire to be taken up into the celestial
company. She proves herself of constantly devoted will and from this time
wisdom speaks to her as an inner illumination. (L. G. B., I, p. 15 ff.)

[Retirement is a precondition of introversion and of withdrawal into
oneself. The uninitiated who is to be admitted is, to use the language of
alchemy, the subjectum, in whom the process of purification is to be
perfected. The alchemists put the subjectum into a narrow vessel so as to
be hermetically sealed from the outer world. There it is subjected to
putrefaction as in a grave. Introversion leads into the depths of one’s
very heart. “Where were you formed?” “In my heart [or inner man].” “Where
after this?” “In the Way to the Lodge.” “What determined you...?” “My own
free and unconstrained will.” The uninitiated are recommended to take
counsel seriously with regard to their important resolution. “Why are
you...?” “Because I was in darkness and desired light.” The death symbol
in the sch. K. is later to be considered. I can naturally go into a few
only of the analogies. The informed reader will largely increase the
number of parallels very easily.]

Jane Leade seeks in the spirit for the key that can open the entrance into
the great secret that lies deep hidden within her. Her effort to reach the
holy city is great but at first ineffectual. [One is not admitted without
further effort.] She wanders around the city and finds no entrance. [Way
to the Lodge—“Why have they not led you the nearest way to the Lodge?” “In
order to acquaint me with the difficulties and troubles that one must
first overcome before one finds the way of virtue.”] She is apprehensive
that she must, lacking the wonderful key, now grope all her days in
darkness ... never find the gate. “While I, now overpowered with fear and
horror at all this, was plunged [Symbols and processes in the sch. K. Roll
of the terrible Br. It is probably well founded psychologically, a fact
that I should like to emphasize in opposition to Fischer, Kat. Erl., I, on
Question 7.] into a deep silence and stillness, the word of wisdom itself
was revealed to me and said: ‘O deeply searching spirit, be not surprised
that you have not realized your hopes for so long a time. So far you have
been with many others caught in a great error, yet as you know and are
sorry for your error, I will apprize you what sort of a key it must be....
And although this wonderful Key of Wisdom is a free gift, it will yet come
to be of high value to you, O searching spirit, when once you obtain
it.’ ” Nevertheless wisdom goes about and looks for those who deserve it,
[Nothing being made of nothing, the point of departure of the philosophic
work is the finding and choice of the subject. The material to work upon,
say the alchemists, is quite common and is met with everywhere. It is
necessary only to know how to distinguish it, and that is where all the
difficulty lies. We continually experience it in masonry, for we often
initiate the profane, whom we should have rejected had we been
sufficiently clear sighted. Not all material is good to make a mercury.
The work can succeed only if we succeed in finding a suitable subject; so
masonry makes many inquiries before admitting a candidate to the tests.
(W. S. H., p. 87.)] She does this so as to write herself on the inner
walls of their hearts and in each and every one meet their thoughts which
wait upon her laws and counsel, [Obedience of apprentices. The laws of
wisdom are meant.] and brings a kingdom with it which will be well worth
sacrificing everything for. [Laying aside of all metal. The newly admitted
brother is “through his unclothing” (which probably belongs here) to
represent mankind symbolically, as he comes from the hand of nature, and
to remind us that the freemason, in order to be continuously mindful of
the fulfillment of his duty must be able to rid himself of all fortuitous
externalities. See Note H at end.] But the greatest and most distinguished
master work, says wisdom, consists alone in your keeping your spirit
disciplined and learned, and making it a skilled worker or artist, to give
it knowledge of what material, as well as in what number, weight and
measure [Surveying, geometry.] to make this pure key, which [material] is
the bright pure divinity in the number three, the mighty in truth.... It
is distinguished as a surpassingly mighty glory and lordliness which sits
in a circle of heaven within the hearts of men. [The connection of circle
(doubly significant) and heart is interesting. As is well known the circle
is placed on the bleeding left breast. In the old English ritual the
touching with the point of an instrument (sword or the like) is proved
“Because the left breast is nearest to the heart, so that it may be so
much the more a prick in my conscience as it then pricked my skin.”] It
does with the plumbline of its power measure the temple and inner court
with those who worship there. [The line in connection with the temple: the
“binding” on a carpet; an image of the curtain string in the holy of
holies in Solomon’s temple. “Just as this ribbon holds and closes the
curtain, so an indissoluble bond unites and holds together all free and
accepted Masonic brothers (also those who worship therein).” This is
wisdom’s key [Surveying, Geometry.] which will make our hands drop with
sweet smelling myrrh upon the handles of the lock (Solomon’s Song, V, 5).
When now I opened your secret gate with this key, my soul failed within me
and I had no strength in me, the sun of reason and the moon of my extended
senses were confounded and vanished. I knew nothing by myself of the
active properties of nature and the creature. “What have you seen as ...?”
“Nothing that reason can grasp.”] The wheel of motion stood still and
something else was moved by a central fire, so that I felt myself turned
into a bright flame. Whereupon this word came to me: This is nothing else
than the gate of my everlasting depths; can you stay in this fiery region,
which is wisdom’s dwelling and abode, in which it meets holy remote
spirits and gives them a fiery principle? For if thou canst take heed such
that thou comest hither at its order; then no secret shall be kept from
thee. So far I have been permitted to approach the entrance to your house,
where I must still stay until I hear further from you what is to be done.
(L. G. B., I, pp. 17-19.)

[As we hear it is therefore right to keep the spirit corrected and
disciplined. “Why came ye ... to subdue my passions—to subject my
will....” We see two triads. A divine three (3 great lights), and then
sun, moon and central fire, which second three can be called the lesser
lights, as the “M. v. St.” appears as a central fire. If we remember that
the didactic voice proceeds, according to this symbolism, from a fire or
light (Wisdom), this light is identical with the M. v. St. in the
function, and it is determined by exactly that. The central fire is
naturally also the blazing star. This stands on the tapis between sun and
moon and it is designed to illuminate the innermost space of the temple.
From alchemy we are well acquainted with [Symbol: Sun], [Symbol: Moon] and
an intermediate and mediating light, namely [Symbol: Mercury]. This light
can be also symbolized as [Symbol: Star of David]. To the alchemistic
point of view correspond quite closely the three great lights of the
Freiburg Ritual, God, man and St. John’s light. This (the [Symbol:
mercury]) is the intelligence and the talent in men which creates all
science and shows us the truth. It is “the only authority that the
freemason has to recognize unconditionally, namely, the divine ordinance
in his own heart, the celestial fire in his ego.”]

Several weeks later Leade hears again the voice of wisdom. It said to her:
“Separate thyself and withdraw from thy animal sensuous life, it is too
coarse. I cannot appear till that is completely lost and vanished.” [The
alchemistic separation (separatio) and the masonic taking off of parts of
their clothing. I have already made the most necessary remarks about it.
We have to be freed from the things which, as in the eclectic ritual “much
retard the soaring of the spirit and chain man to the earth.” It has an
expressly programmatical meaning (anticipating a later phase) when, e.g.,
the system of the Grand Lodge goes back, for the deprivation from the
metal, to “the temple of Solomon that was built of fully prepared stones,
just as they were brought, etc.,” so that no metal work was needed.] A
short time after Leade is again driven to search after the secret being.
Wisdom requires it to know itself apart from its creature existence.
“Whereupon I was surrounded by gently burning flames that consumed and
burned all thistles, thorns and accursed fluxes [the ‘superfluities’ of
alchemy] which would put themselves forward.... Therefore Wisdom let her
voice be heard and said: ‘O thou troubled spirit, I am now come to tell
thee what was required of thee, as I have not refrained from saying to
thee, even at the beginning of my discourse with thee, what it would cost
thee to attain this key. [First programmatically shown. The actual process
will then follow.] I say to thee, God requires a sacrifice of thee.
Understand me then, thou hast an earthly element that has spread and
covered [Like a garment.] thee, and consequently has got the upper hand
and mastery of thee; these thrones and powers [king or father figure]
must, however, be overthrown and their place found no more. Thou hast
deeply mourned that thou hadst to do without the ever near communion or
union with God thy Creator, [Only the masters sit near the sun.] but be
not surprised at that. The cause lies here in complete extinction because
you are not yet deceased and dead completely in the mystical manner.
[Complete extinction first results in the third degree.] This is the first
baptism that you must experience, but ah, how many have rushed into this
too abruptly, because they have not given their earthly selfishness a
single mortal blow right to the heart. [The circle or sword placed on the
left breast alludes merely to the process of the clearing of conscience.
Here the whole ego is not yet annihilated.] So I recommend to thee my
flaming sword. Be courageous and let it achieve complete execution in the
field of nature [The weed in the field is exterminated where, as Jane
Leade frequently says, ears of corn are to grow.] or banish completely all
young or old, and turn from life toward death whatever in you does not
bear my mark and name that is my image.’ ” [From this the psychological
sense of the countersign is recognized. In connection with the field we
are reminded especially of Shibboleth (Judges XIII, 6: The Ephraimites who
could not speak it had to die). Leade often mentions the Ephraimites.
Directly pertinent to the above passage is, of course, Revelations,
passim.] (L. G. B., I, pp. 21 ff.) The earthly is, as it were, to be
sacrificed to God as a burnt offering or melted away in a fiery furnace,
in a vessel of the purest metal. [Probably it will not be superfluous to
remark that in the Bible the first worker in all kinds of metal was Tubal
Cain, whose name is a password.] Jane Leade finds “the conditions or
circumstances which thou [Wisdom] requirest of me to be very hard;
especially do I find myself still dwelling in the offspring of a mortal
shadow, where whole millions of spirits tempt me and employ all their
ability and strength to hinder and hold me back from the high and noble
exaltation and aspiration, [The seductive and restraining voices in the
circuitous way or on the way to the Lodge according to the eclectic
ritual. The band corresponds to the mortal shadow.] while I, alone and
seeing the receptacle and fire before me, stood in thought about it and
pondered the matter, and was willing, like Isaac, to ask, But where is the
lamb? [The apron is of lamb’s fleece.] She [Sophia = Wisdom] answered my
unspoken question with these words: You yourself must be the paschal lamb
that shall be slain. Thereupon I was instructed to say or to beg: Then
give yet this life pulse a stroke so that it may completely return. And as
I stretched out my neck, so to speak, to the love flaming sword, I felt
that a separation or beheading had taken place. [Note the baring of the
neck, the guttural and its meaning given according to the content of the
old form of oath. The fate of the traitor befalls the man who is slain at
this point; he has been a traitor to the inner true man. It is here the
place to bear in mind the descending scale of marks (guttural, pectoral,
stomachal). Man is to be transmuted on rectangular principles, or in the
language of alchemy, is to be tinctured with the divine tincture. This
tincturing seizes first the most spiritual and advances steadily until the
whole man is transformed. The trichotomy corresponds to the Platonic (and
alchemistic) tripartite division of the powers of the soul. Plato
distinguishes the reasoning soul, which he places in the head, the
intellectual in the breast, and the affective in the abdomen. The entire
soul, even the vegetative, is to be illuminated by the highest light. If
we assume that it is more than a pretty picture, Staudenmaier’s view
becomes of interest, namely that man may have an extraordinary spiritual
perfection in bestowing consciousness through practice upon the centers
that ordinarily work vegetatively without consciousness. In this way he
gains power over a whole army of working powers that otherwise escape him.
Staudenmaier’s own experiences teach that all the dangers of introversion
are connected with such a training, and it may easily happen that we are
defeated by the spirits that we invoke, instead of becoming their masters.
The absolute mastery of the rational ego is, however, evidently the
foundation of the ethical work of perfection. Kenning’s doctrine is
related to the theories of Staudenmaier.] Oh, how sweet and pleasant it is
to perceive the life blood flowing into the fountain of the same divinity
from which it came.” Whereupon wisdom opened more of her secrets to her.
(L. G. B., I, p. 24.)

It may be that this is the most suitable place to mention another series
of visions (apropos of the building of the tabernacle, L. G. B., I, pp. 24
ff.): “It [the holy ark] is an impregnable fortress and tower, so go thou
not out [so says Wisdom], but bind thyself and ally thyself here as a
disciple, to hold out to the end, then thou wilt be learned in the lofty
spiritual art of the everlasting mystery, and be instructed how this
incomparable composition or medicine of the healing elixir and balsam of
life is prepared. Above all thou must enter a bond of silence and vow to
reveal it to no one outside of your fellow learners, who are called
together near and with you, to work at this very art. [I hardly need to
mention the duty under oath, but will only call attention to the group of
the three virtues of the newly entering: attentiveness, silence,
fidelity.] Further thou must completely bide the definite time and year of
it, in all fidelity and patience indefatigable, until thou succeedest in
making this oil as well, and preserve it in the beautiful snow-white
alabaster box of consummate nature, and art as fit and perfect as thy
instructress.”

I continue in the earlier series of forms. Jane Leade is required by
wisdom to follow her. “But all of a sudden I was surprised by a mighty
enemy, who pressed me hard while he accused and complained that I was
breaking the laws of nature, to which I was still bound because I had an
external body, for whose elemental wants I must take reasonable care, ...
as all my neighbors in the world did, who were under the rule of the grand
monarch of the [worldly calculating] reason, under whose scepter
everything must mortify what lives in the sensual animal life....” [The
man who lives only for the satisfaction of physical needs cannot serve our
purpose.... There is a higher life than that to which millions are chained
like an animal. To this higher life the Master is to devote himself, and
to it he is metaphorically initiated in the admission. Common nature, the
prince of this world, strives against these requirements.] “Yes,” says the
prince of the earthly life, “how wilt thou turn aside from my laws and
throw thy brother’s yoke from thy neck?” Leade turns to her mother,
Wisdom, who promises her to take God’s advice how the enemy could be
driven away. The proof should be that they were traitors to the crown, to
honor, and to the lordship of the lamb; they would soon be handed over to
justice. (L. G. B., I, pp. 27 ff.) [Cf. on the one hand, in connection
with “accused and complained,” think of the murderer of the royal
architect. As this is the inner man, both belong together. The “prince of
this world” turns the tables on his accusation; psychologically quite
justifiably.]

After various exhortations Jane Leade receives from Wisdom a book which
she, Wisdom, must read from, “in order to explain to you one letter after
another, [Spelling.], especially you do not yet know the number which
makes up your new name. And as long as you do not see that, what kind of
right and title can you advance for the rest of the entire mastery that is
developed there?” (L. G. B., I, p. 36.) It refers to a transmutation of
the man, which cannot happen all at once; “so highly important a change,
that it could not take place without a passing through many distant
degrees.” (L. G. B., II, p. 78.)

We come to a section that is inscribed, “The Magic Journeys.” [Probably I
shall hardly need now to refer to the meaning of the journey.] It contains
all the other phases of the mystical work. “During my spiritual journey to
the land of all blessed abundance, a magic outline of it was placed before
my eyes, while I was brought to a door which was so low and narrow that I
could enter it only by creeping through on my knees, so that it also
required great effort and trouble. [Obstacle of the door.] And so I was
led farther till, after some time, I came to another door, which was
indeed narrow enough but somewhat more comfortable to go through than the
first. As I thus proceeded, I came finally to a door that had two valves,
one of which opened itself, and was quite right in height and width for my
size, and also admitted me to a place of which I could find neither
beginning nor end. And I said, ‘What am I doing here alone?’ Whereupon my
invisible guide who had led me through these three doors or gates replied
that still others would come after me, when they should hear that there
was anywhere so great a country that was to be possessed by new
inhabitants, and that should be filled and blessed also with all kinds of
goods.” (L. G. B., I, p. 40.) [The three gates refer not merely to the
three degrees, but have still for themselves another analogue in the
initiation. In the old English system the aspirant knocks, because the
door offers him a resistance, on the backs of the three officials. They
are, as it were, the spiritual doors of the brotherhood. The resistance,
and how it is gradually presented in Leade’s description, is readily
understood psychologically; the nature of the aspirant is the more adapted
the further he advances on his work.]

“This idea and apparition and the account and explanation following
thereupon were very powerful; so that I entered into the thoughts of it
ever deeper, ... so that I ... also might perceive the explanation and
meaning of the gates. For although my spirit saw naught but an infinite
spaciousness [compare previous pages] I perceived and felt [Infinite
spread of the lodge in accordance with the examination.] still the blowing
of so fragrant and refreshing a breeze, as if all kinds of flowers
actually stood blooming there. [Does the question as to the mason’s wind
belong here psychologically? In any case the pleasant breeze comes from
the east. Jane Leade often describes her flower garden as oriental.
Psychologically and mythologically the breeze has the value of a spermatic
symbol. Anagogically it is concerned with the bestowing of a power or (to
retain the procreation metaphor) the impregnation with such a power.]
Therefore this word was revealed and spoken to me: ‘This is space and
place where the love realm is to arise and become verdant with its natural
inhabitants, who have laid aside their crass self-love [selfishness] and
left it behind them, as it might not come here; even as it is the one
which makes the entrance so narrow and crowded....’ Hereupon I saw in my
spirit unexpectedly different persons, modified out of measure in their
bodies, and they were so highly versed in this mystery that they breathed
forth such a spirit from them that they could give being and existence to
everything that they willed and desired. At times they spread golden tents
and went in and out of them, at other times in places that appeared to be
quite waste and desolate they made wonderful plants and trees to grow up,
which actually offered their perfect fruit that appeared in a bright
golden radiance; of which it was related that they were the magical
nourishment and food on which the inhabitants of this land were supposed
to live.” [We may also say the masters of the art cultivate an
uncultivated people, and provide spiritual nourishment at the drawing
table.] “And although at my first entrance here it seemed that I saw
nothing, yet I did see after a few moments this whole spacious place
filled with spirits of so high a degree that they attracted me at once.
Thereupon they set me divers philosophical questions [Catechizing.] which
I did not understand. So one of them in a very friendly manner offered to
instruct and teach me; said further that he would teach me the secret of
their art.... Accordingly he brought me into a magnificent tent, and
requested me to wait there so that I might advance into the pure acts or
works of faith, because I would succeed thereby in becoming an adept in
this high philosophy. Now when, thereupon, Wisdom herself appeared to me,
I asked her who it was that had set me the philosophical questions?
Whereupon she answered me that they were the old and last living worthies,
and they were the believing holy ones, taught by her in her inward and
outward divine magic stone; and that the time was coming in which she
desired to make new artists and poets in this theosophic wisdom, who
should give a form to the things that had been so odiously disgraced and
lay under a cloud of contempt, ignorance and disgrace. Especially, no
other way besides this could be found than that the deep mine, in which
the treasure had lain hidden so long, should be broken open and unsealed.
[The lost that must be found again is called in freemasonry the master
word. The master wandering has the object of seeking what was lost there
[in the East] and has [partly] been found again.] Hereupon the apostle
John [Well beloved] spoke to me, to whom the secret was well known, and
who was the person who had spoken so kindly to me before, with these
words: ‘Just as a natural stone, so is there also a spiritual stone which
is the root and the foundation of all that the sons of art have brought
visibly into being and into the light. And just as the external is
corporeal, and consists in work of the hands, and consumes a great amount
of time before it can be brought to perfection, so also is the internal
elaborated from degree to degree....’ Therefore I begged and asked the
angel John in what manner I might go to work, to work out the same?” The
“angel John” accorded her the permission. Just as a furnace is used for a
chemical preparation, so also a furnace is necessary for the preparation
of the spiritual Philosopher’s Stone. This outer furnace is, however, the
corporeal man, in which “the fire seeds of pure divinity itself are
kindled by the essence of the soul, when he finds for it a hallowed and
properly prepared vessel. The materia in which one must labor or work is
the divine salt, which is placed in a pure clear crystalline glass, the
pure spirit. Further shouldst thou know, that this divine salt is
concealed in all men.” (L. G. B., I, pp. 40-43.)

Here I must insert the discussion of the salt (also salt stone) and its
effect. We must understand clearly that the salt stone of this symbolism
is the same as the cubical stone of the masonics. That the salt is
hieroglyphically represented by a cube, I have already shown. The concept
stone is the parting of the ways for two symbol groups of similar meaning,
both of which Jane Leade uses. The one group is the chemical preparation,
as the angel John just now described it; the other is the treatment of the
stone as a building stone (which is to be dressed, etc.) found in other
passages from Jane Leade, namely, in connection with the building of a
temple, a sanctuary, the New Jerusalem. Important use is made of men as
building stones preëminently in her “Revelation of Revelations.” This one
passage from L. G. B. (II, p. 138) may be quoted: “Who will now blow this
trumpet of mine that they may break loose from their iron yokes and bonds
and come hither, so that they may become worthy to be built in as well-cut
pillars for the temple of wisdom.” The quadrangular form is several times
mentioned also. Jane Leade is quite right when she says that the divine
salt, the cubic stone, lies concealed in all men; the unprepared man is
the crude stone and in him lies to be developed (potentially not actually)
the cubic. In the preparation of the stone, the alchemistic as well as the
building stone, it depends on the clearing away of the disturbing
elements, not on ornamentation. The purification (rectificatio,
purificatio, etc.) of the alchemistic stone exactly corresponds to the
working over the raw stone with the pick. Crystallization produces the
regular form; fixation, the density. The projection corresponds to the
employment in the building of the temple (which appears infrequently in
symbolism). Probably the most appropriate place for these passages (L. G.
B., I, pp. 131 ff.) is in connection with this mention of building. “Only
have faith, so I will go before you and reveal my name and show you the
foundation of it [the city], wherefrom your strength increases and your
victorious power shall be known. But who must be your architect to
instruct you in this foundation work of yours but this Wisdom who was with
the great God Jehovah from eternity, who gave you existence and being from
the breath of the eternal Will? Therefore thus and in such manner the
motivating power of the will must result and proceed.... Come therefore to
me and I will show you where all these foundation stones lie. Look and see
the material of the treasure in the circumference of your new earth....
Here you might spy out or find this foundation, [Cf. what was said
previously about the new earth], for which purpose will be given to you
the golden measuring line, or the plummet of my spirit.” [The master
stands on the pillar of strength. Jehovah was the last master word.]

We stopped where the angel John says we should know that the divine salt
is hidden in all men. It goes on: “but it has lost its power and savor,
and such is the principle of light that includes all other principles,
because man, although quite unknown to himself, is an abstract and concept
in brief of all worlds. Therefore he may find in himself all that he
seeks; only it cannot happen before the salt alone, which has lain as
dead, has been again raised to life through Christ the Freestone (who
calcines the black to a jasper brilliance and to a beautiful whiteness).
This is the true theosophic medicine, which indeed gradually, or little by
little, works out of itself, from itself, and into itself, even as a grain
of wheat which when it is sown does, by the coöperation of the sun and the
outer planets, forms itself into a body. Only one has to watch and pay
attention so that no birds of prey come and pick it up [Cf. Figure 3, p.
199] before it comes to its maturity and full time. For just such a state
[as with the grain of wheat] exists in the case of the gold stone, which
lies hidden in the foundation of nature, is nourished by the warm fiery
influence of the divine sun and through the moist seeds of the spiritual
Luna [sperma luna] is watered, which makes it grow through the inner
penetration and union of the planetary powers of the higher order, which
draw the weaker and lower into themselves, impregnate and swallow them.
Whereby the mastery is obtained over all that is astral and elemental. In
this manner the beloved John revealed to me the nature of the royal stone,
as it was revealed to him in the island of Patmos (there by him was
brought forth what he possessed in the spirit). And he told me further
concerning this: that where the universal or general love is born in any
one, such would be the true signature and token that this seraphic stone
would there be formed and take to itself a bodily shape.” (L. G. B., I, p.
44).

[Here we meet clearly the trinity [Symbol: Sun] [Symbol: Philosopher’s
Stone] [Symbol: Moon], sun, moon, and as an outgrowth of both the [Symbol:
Philosopher’s Stone] gold stone, the Philosopher’s Stone, which unites in
itself the [Symbol: Gold] and [Symbol: Silver] or which is the same
[Symbol: Fire] and [Symbol: Water]. It is therefore not at all a mistake
to see in the [Symbol: Water] a union of action and reaction. The G must
be conceived in the anagogic sense, as the genesis of the Philosopher’s
Stone or as regeneration.] In L. G. B., I, p. 147, I find also this
remarkable passage: “The word of Jesus was revealed to me in the following
manner: O you that wait upon Jerusalem. Through what gate have you
entered? And what have you seen here that you are so desirous of living
here? Have you not been taken in by the fire flaming eye? [The eye is the
flaming star. In L. G. B., I, p. 196, is found the representation of a
face that is equivalent to the eye. A moon is added to it. The eye
[Symbol: Gold] is, as it were, the sun to this moon.] so that you intend
not to go out again from here, till you get another heart [The pectoral
learns who approaches to the flaming star.] which never could be
completely changed?... O then be therefore wise, and await your nuptial
spirit [Genesis] and the garment of the power unfailing. [i. i. d. St.] No
one can ever get that outside of this treasure city, for in this Zion all
must be born anew....” [Oswald Wirth regards the alchemistic concept Rebis
as the expression of the perfect degree of community. “The initiated, who
becomes in some way androgynous, because he unites the virile energy with
the feminine sensitiveness, is represented in alchemy by the Rebis [from
res bina, the double thing]. This substance, at once male and female, is a
mercury [Symbol: Mercury] animated by its sulphur [Symbol: Sulphur] and
transformed by this act into Azoth [Symbol: Mercury], i.e., into this
quintessence of the elements [fifth essence] of which the flaming star is
the symbol. It should be noted that this star is always placed in such a
way that it receives the double radiation of the male sun [Symbol: Gold]
and the female moon [Symbol: Moon]; its light is thus of a bisexual
nature, androgynous or hermaphrodite. The Rebis corresponds otherwise to
the matter prepared by the final work, otherwise called the journeyman who
has been made worthy to be raised to the mastery.” (W. S. H., p.99.)]

But to return to Jane Leade’s magical journey. “Hereupon I was moved
(because I well knew and was certain that this heavenly stone already had
its birth and growth in me) [Rebirth = the cubical stone’s change from
potentiality to actuality] with great frankness to ask whether my external
furnace [her own body] would keep so long, and not perish [die] before the
stone would have attained its perfection. Whereupon this dear saint [John]
said to me in answer: Worry and trouble not yourself about this but be
only patient in hope; for the true philosophic tree is grown and in a fair
way to produce ripe fruit.” (L. G. B., I, pp. 44 ff.) The preparation of
the stone is now described by John according to the well known outlines.
For “said Wisdom and the apostle John to me: Henceforth you shall be
brought to the old worthy heroes of the faith who have [The masters too.]
effected projection with the stone [= the work of transmutation]. And
after I was brought there I saw the patriarchs or arch fathers and all the
great philosophers, who had been taught by God himself both in the earlier
and in the later times. After that I was led into a darkness and gloom,
which was of itself changed by a magic power into a clear silver light.”
(L. G. B., I, p. 46.) Several other allegories follow for the changing
activity, as described already (L. G. B., I, p. 41). John explains that
all the wonders were accomplished with the stone of wisdom and that
whoever has worked out this stone in himself is marked as one sealed
[Sigillum, Hermetes, Sealing with the Trowel, mark of salvation, Mark
Mason.] of God with the power from above.

A further communication of the preceding vision [sc. Magic Journey] gives
the following additional information: “The Word came to me and said: The
love bond between God and thee must not be loosened but tightly knotted.
Meanwhile the spirit is the only eternal substance and property in which
thou must labor and toil. That it may then cling to you so fast and
strongly that it may draw thee quite closely to it and may establish thee
within the circle of the immeasurable love; from which enmity is sundered,
and the curse of the elements is separated and wholly taken away. O go in,
go, I say, into it, for this is the infinite space, that thou hast seen,
and which is to be found inside the third door. [Does this need any
explanation?] This invisible love bond will perfect thee through the first
gate, which is so narrow and low, and therefore also through the other two
gates; in case that thou wilt yield everything in thee completely in all
its length and breadth so that it may be able quickly to raise thee. For,
dear one, what is to return thee so mightily to the desired enjoyment of
all abundance and good as the love of God? Therefore be strong and
courageous in love, in going through these divers gates, and fear not any
attack of the adversary till thou hast entered this hallowed country and
art wedded therein to thy beloved.”

A complaint that was made of Wisdom by her pilgrim: “Meanwhile as I lay in
my deep struggle, came there a spirit of prayer down, who made an earnest
supplication and unutterable sighing, rise towards heaven, [The
lamentation at the grave of the Master.] which as I felt most clearly,
penetrated and broke through the gate of the eternal profound, so that my
spirit had an entrance to the secret chamber of pure godhead, wherein I
had audience and complete freedom to pour out my lamentations and show my
wounds and tell who had pierced me. For each and every hand was against
me, let fly their stinging arrows at me, and burdened and oppressed still
more that which hung already, dropping blood, upon the cross, and cried
and said, Crucify, crucify her, make her really feel death in the
dying.... I was in violent birth travail. All woes and onsets, however,
made a greater opening for the birth of life, and gave me an entrance into
the holy place, wherein first I heard the eternal tones. And then after
this, as I gained the strength to be in a pleasant quiet, I was in a clear
water, [Tears.], in which no mud nor any refuse arose; also no implement
was lifted to any work there, nor was any noise nor uproar heard.” [Just
as in the building of Solomon’s temple.] (L. G. B., I, p. 48.)

Now Leade hears the comforting voice of the “Bridegroom” (the unio
mystica) which brings to her view the perfection she has striven for, and
commands her to touch no unclean spirits of this world. [Gloves.] Only
what is detached from sin may come near him. The bridegroom is answered by
Leade’s soul-spirit: “Lord, how can this be done? For although I have had
a great longing towards this ministration [the holy service] that I might
be ever near thee, the spirit of this world [See previous.] has made claim
to this shell or body of mine, and says that I have not yet stepped out
the bounds and sphere of his dominion. The external man is encompassed by
hunger and thirst, heat and cold [antitheses of the Hindu philosophy],
which are wont to entangle his external senses in such things as are
external, in such a way that no one can live in such pure abstraction and
seclusion, until he is relieved of and freed from all care for the
external body. This is what I bewailed with tears, and expressly asked God
whether it was not possible for the eternal mind and spirit to supply all
necessaries for the bodily part without aid of the spirit of reason, who
is king in that realm where malediction rules?” [In other words, whether
it was not possible in the living life to be released from contradiction
(as it is called in the Bhagavad-Gita), to quite tear away the bonds of
animal sensuous being, and definitively allow the eternal principles to be
active. The question is whether the terrestrial stone is, in its complete
perfection, on the whole possible, whether the ethical ideal in absolute
purity can be pragmatically realized.]

“Whereupon after a short blocking and stilling of my external senses, I
received this answer [of the Bridegroom]; that this could not be until a
complete death of the body of sin was suffered, showing me that which is
written in the 6th verse of the seventh chapter of Romans, that after that
was perished and dead, wherein we were held, we should serve God in
newness of spirit.” (L. G. B., I, pp. 50 ff.)

[Here we have then the requirement to become wholly dead to the realm of
sin, in order to be able to rise fully to the ethical ideal. The question
whether this is possible in life remains open, to be sure. In symbolism
this mystical death and the union with the highest spirit was represented
symbolically in the highest degree of freemasonry. The representative of
the Highest is the Master degree of the M. v. St. and he fills the dead,
as it were, with his life, as the raising takes place (H in H, F against
F, K against K, etc.), like the reviving of the child by Elijah (I Kings
XVIII, 21). As for the necessary decay of the body before the raising
(“The skin leaves,” etc.) let us quote the passage, L. G. B., I, pp. 271
ff.: [the divine word speaks] “Know ... that I have not left thee without
a potent and rich talent which lies in thine own keeping, although deep
hidden and covered with a threefold covering (Exod., XXXIX 34, Num. IV, 5,
6), which must be removed before thou canst see this costly garment. The
first covering is the coarse dark appearance of this earthly realm ... the
second is the fast-binding [directed upon the mundane] reason ... the
third is the baser natural senses.... Provided that thou thoroughly
determine with the firm resolution to break through these three obstacles,
thou wilt come to the golden mass.... While it is given to ye then to know
where the treasure really lies [Seeking out of the grave. The three
murderers, who have hidden the corpse, are these very ‘three obstacles.’]
and you have my spirit on this, which will not alone seek for it but will
with the hand of its strength strongly coöperate with you; [To revive the
mystical dead.] so resolve as united in the spirit ... to break through
that and to break it up, which lies as a covering over this princely
being.... Pray and do not only wait [no idle mysticism] but struggle and
work until you have released, set free and liberated this power hidden in
a prison; which may be exalted upon the throne of empire, since in truth
my spirit as well as yours has hitherto not been displaced from its
kingdom except by force and unrighteousness.” [With reference to the
raising (cf. L. G. B., III, pp. 87, 91); in that place three degrees of
mystical development are described in the similitude of three altars.
Under the last altar, which is built of quadrangular stones, in which one
can see his own face as in mirrors, lies the life trampled to death, which
will again be wakened.]

“Knowest thou not, I was asked, that the law of sin has the mastery as
long as it [the body with its selfish tendencies] lives? So that the
spirit clearly bore witness and gave me to understand that nothing could
make me worthy of this marriage with the Lamb [unio mystica] except an
absolute death, since he wedded only the maidenly spirit, to be one flesh
with him, [H in H, F against F, etc.] and by so doing changed it into his
own pure manhood. [Humanity.] And this is the generation or birth to an
actively self-sufficient being, which rises out of the old one. For just
as the grain of wheat perishes or dies in the earth and comes into a new
life, just so it goes also with the arising and the growing up of the new
creation, which in truth is Christ our life, whose appearance will put an
end to the sins in us. For, dear one, what has brought on the curse, care,
trouble, misery, weaknesses, which press and torture the poor man in this
fallen state of his but the departing from God? And as long as he is in
this condition, he is a debtor to sin and under its dominion; which
subjects him to all affliction and misery, which are wont to follow the
footsteps of those who live in the elemental flesh. Now without doubt it
is good and joyful tidings to hear of a possibility of drawing out and
putting off this body of sins; and in truth the prophet who has arisen in
me has prophesied that such a day was at hand. Be dismayed at it, ye that
are the wounders and despisers of this grace; which I see is now near
being revealed, for the bridal garments are being prepared ... [Cf. the
end of the parable.] O Wisdom, the preparation and ordering of the bridal
garments is given in charge to you alone, which shall be of divers colors,
with which the king’s daughter, [Analogue of the king’s son, the improved
son figure of the parable.] who is entrusted to thy teaching and
instruction, may be distinguished from all others, and known [as
redeemed].” (L. G. B., I, pp. 51 ff., wherewith the magic journey is
ended.)

Thus there is a confident tone, a hope in that which loses itself in the
infinite. But Leade suspects that it is an unattainable ideal and knows
what regulative import it has: “Ah, who up to this hour has traveled so
far, and what are all our realized gifts until we have reached this goal
[union with the Divinity]. Can our plummet even sound it and explore in
the deep abyss, the matchless wonder of the immeasurable being? And
because the revolving wheel of my spirit has found no rest in all that it
has seen, known, possessed and enjoyed, it stretched its errant senses
continuously towards what was still held back, and kept, by the strong
rock of omnipotence; to struggle towards which with a fresh attack I
resolutely determined, and would be sent away with nothing less than the
kingdom and the ruling power of the Holy Ghost.” (L. G. B., I, p. 87.)

In a parallel between the old and new royal art, I cannot overlook the
French masonic writer Oswald Wirth, who has worked in the same province. I
agree with him in general; although much of his method of interpretation
seems to me too arbitrary. I have already called attention to several
passages from W. S. H. on the preparation of the subject [i.e., the
uninitiated]. I will endeavor to outline the contents of the rest of the
work according to the ideas of Wirth.

Having given up himself, the Subjectum is overcome in the philosophic egg
[preparation chamber, i.e., sch. K.] by sadness and suffering. His
strength ebbs away, the decomposition begins; the subtle is separated from
the coarse. [Smaragdine tablet.] That is the first phase of the air test.
After descending to the center of the earth [Visita interiora terrae,
etc.—Smaragdine tablet, 6, 8.] where the roots of all individuality meet,
the spirit rises up again [Smaragdine tablet, 10.] released from the caput
mortuum, which is blacked on the floor of the hermetic receptacle. The
residuum is represented by the cast-off raiment of the novice. Laboriously
now, he toils forward in the darkness; the heights draw him on; escaping
hell he will attain to heaven. His ascent up the holy mountain is hindered
by a violent storm; he is thrown into the depths by the tempest: a symbol
of circulation in the closed vessel of the alchemists, which vessel
corresponds to the protected lodge. During the circulation the volatile
parts rise and fall again like rain, which is symbolized by the tears upon
the walls. To be sure, it is not here that the neophyte is subjected to
the water test, and if a confusion is possible on this point it comes from
the fact that all the operations of the great work go on in one vessel,
while the masonic initiation is completed in a suite of different rooms,
so that the symbolic series here suffers disintegration. The circulating
water, which soaks into the pores of the earthly parts of the subject,
purifies it more and more, so that it goes from gray through a series of
colors (peacock’s tail) to white. In this stage the material corresponds
to the wise man who knows how to resist all seduction. Yet we are not to
be satisfied with this negative virtue; the fire test (we should remember
that the four tests by the elements were to be found in the parable also)
is still to be gone through, the calcination, which burns everything
combustible. After the calcination there is a perfectly purified salt
[Symbol: Salt] of absolute transparence. So long as the novice has not
attained this moral clearness, the light cannot be vouchsafed to him. In
brief, in the first degree, the main thing is the comprehensive
purification. The salt layers must be made crystal clear, that surround
the inner sulphur [Symbol: Sulphur] like a crust and hinder it from its
free radiation. Sulphur is to be regarded as a symbol of the expansive
power, as individual initiative, as will. Mercury stands opposite to it as
woman does to man, as that which goes to the subject from without, or as
absolute receptivity. Salt is midway between both; in it the equilibrium
between [Symbol: Sulphur] and [Symbol: Mercury] is found. It is a symbol
of what appears as the stable being of man. In the first degree the
purification of the salt is worked out for the release of the sulphur. The
red column J corresponds to the red sulphur, by which symbolically the
novices get their reward. For the rest, the first degree is satisfied with
getting the novices to see the universal light (the blazing star). (W. S.
H., pp. 88-92.)

The fire test takes place in the second degree. The fiery sulphur must be
worked out or rather sent out and used for work. The field of activity of
the member proportions itself, as it were, according to the expansion or
range of its sulphurous radiation. At this time the member enters into a
relation of such intensified activity with the world that the intellectual
grasp [which corresponds to the [Symbol: Mercury] = principal] acquires
from it a new illumination [blazing star], and breaks away for a
connection of the will, which was at first merely individual, with the
collectivity. To me at least that appears to be the sense of the
figurative but not quite clear exposition of W. S. H., pp. 952-962, which
I have, for the sake of exactness, given in the original text. [See
Appendix, Note I.] As soon as the crude stone is cut and polished we have
no longer to work inward but outward. What we are to accomplish so
creatively would be insignificant if we did not know the secret of
borrowing power from a power that apparently lies without us. Where do
these mysterious powers work if not at the pillar B, whose name means: i.
i. d. St.? In the north directed on the contrary towards the moon, whose
soft feminine light it reflects, it corresponds to [Symbol: Mercury],
which unceasingly flows towards all being, in order to support its central
fire, [Symbol: Fire]. The exaltation of the latter leads to the fire test,
the idea of which Wirth seems to take in strictly occult form, in the
manner of Eliphas Levi. Finally, a circulation takes place, in that the
individual will seeks like a magnet to draw the divine will, always falls
down again, rises, however, and so on in cycles, till both meet in the
“philosophical fire.” It is the cycle of which we read in the Smaragdine
Tablet. The incombustible essence that comes forth from the fire test is
the phœnix (a figure much used by the alchemists). The member has the task
of changing himself into the phœnix. Not only [Symbol: Fire] belongs to
the work, however, but also the act must be guided by intelligence;
activity and receptivity must complement each other. Therefore the member
has to know both pillars thoroughly. And therefore he becomes also the
already mentioned androgynous material, Rebis. That is only to be attained
when the elemental propensities are overcome, therefore the figure Rebis
is represented as standing on the dragon. (W. S. H., pp. 96-101.)

What will the master do now? He will identify himself with the Master
Builder of all worlds, in order to work in him and through him. When any
one says that that is mysticism, he is not wrong. Being developed on the
three successive ways of purgatio, illuminatio, and unio, this mysticism
is no less logical than the religious mysticism that with its
mortifications, if it were only rightly understood, would accomplish the
same purpose. Mortification is, as the word itself says, the endeavor for
a certain kind of death. Twice is the mason enjoined to die; at the
beginning in the preparation room and at the end at the final initiation
into the inmost chamber. The second death corresponds to the perfection of
the grand mastery. It signifies the complete sacrifice of his personality,
the renunciation of every personal desire. It is the effacement of that
radical egotism that caused the fall of Adam, in that he dragged down
spirituality into corporeality. The narrow pusillanimous ego melts into
nothing before the high impersonal self, symbolized by Hiram. The mythical
sins of the eternal universal human Adam are thus expatiated. The
architect of the temple is to the Grand Master Builder of All Worlds (G.
B. a. W.) just what in Christian symbolism the Word become flesh is to the
Eternal Father. In order to carry on the work of the universal structure
with advantage the Master must enter into the closest union of the will
with God. No longer a slave in anything he is the more a master of all,
the more his will works in harmony with the one that rules the universe.
“Placed between the abstract and the concrete, between the creative
intelligence and the objective creation, man thus conceived, appears like
the mediator par excellence, or the veritable Demiurge of the gnostics.”
Yet it is not enough that he gets light from its original source, he must
also be bound by endless activity to those whom he is to lead. The
necessary bond is sympathy, love. “The master must make himself loved and
he can only succeed by himself loving with all the warmth of a generosity
extending even to absolute devotion, even to the sacrifice of himself.”
The pelican [We are already acquainted with this hermetic bird.] is the
hieroglyph for this loving sacrifice without which every effort remains
vain. (W. S. H., p. 105.)

The master’s degree, this necessarily last degree, corresponds to an ideal
that is set us as a task: we must strive towards it even if its
realization is beyond our powers. Our temple will never be finished, and
no one expects to see the true eternal Hiram arise in himself. (W. S. H.,
p. 94.)

We find also in Wirth, how the work is divided into three main steps,
which begin with the purifying, turn towards the inner soul, and end with
the death-resembling Unio Mystica; here we find, too, in the last degree
the unattainable ideal, which like a star in heaven shall give a sure
course to the voyage of our life. The viewing of the exalted anagogic
conception as a perspective vanishing point, makes allowance for the
possible errors of superposition in the anagogic aspect of the elementary
types.

The tripartite division, which we meet in the great work, shows the
frequently doubted inner qualification of the three degrees of
freemasonry. As they answer a need, they have again prevailed, although
they were not existent in the masonic form of the royal art at the
beginning (about two centuries ago); I say “again,” because similar needs
have already earlier produced similar forms. (Cf. L. Keller’s writings.)
Whether we consider ethical education in general or the intensive
(introversion) form of it, mysticism, we have in either case a process of
development, and degrees are necessary to express it symbolically. The
effort, appearing from time to time, to multiply the degrees has been
justified. We can divide what is divided into three sections into seven
also (7 operations in alchemy, 7 levels of contemplation, 7 ordinations,
etc.), although it is not really needed. But the idea of abolishing the
three degrees can only arise from a misapprehension of the value of the
existing symbolism. That masonry is a union of equal rights is not
affected by the presence of the degrees, provided that their symbolic
significance is not overstepped. The degrees form a constituent part of
the symbolic custom itself and like it are to be intangible.

The symbols of all the lofty spiritual religious communities, for which
the royal art presents itself as a paradigm or exemplar, put before us, as
it were, types of truth. Single facts which the symbols may signify (or
that could be read into the symbols) are not the most important, but
rather the totality of all these meanings. The totality (which can be
acquired only by a sort of integration) is something inexpressible; and if
it also succeeded in expressing this inexpressible, the words of the
expression would be incomprehensible to any finite spirit, as the
individual facts are.

The symbols are the unchangeable, the individual meanings are the
variegated and the changeable. [As for the masonic symbolism in
particular, I am in agreement with Robert Fischer (Kat. Erl., III, fin.).
“Freemasonry rests on symbols and ceremonies; in that lies its superior
title to continued existence. They are created for eternal verities and
peculiarly adapted thereto; they are fitted to every grade of culture,
indeed to every time, and do not fall like other products of the time, a
sacrifice to time itself.... Therefore a complete abolition of our symbols
can meet with assent as little as an enfeeblement of them can be desired.
Much more must we strive in order that a clear understanding may sift out
the abstract, corresponding to our spiritual eye, from the concrete
necessary for our physical eye, so that the combined pictures shall be
resolved in the simple fundamental truths. By this means the symbols
attain life and motion and cannot be put down for things that decay with
time.”] Therefore the symbols should never be changed in favor of a
particular meaning, which becomes the fashion (or be brought closer to it
over and above the given relation). What is to be maintained through
variations of meaning, is not the meanings but the symbols themselves.

To each person symbols represent his own truth. To every one they speak a
different language. No one exhausts them. Every one seeks his ideal
chiefly in the unknown. It matters not so much what ideal he seeks, but
only that he does seek one. Effort itself, not the object of effort, forms
the basis of development. No seeker begins his journey with full knowledge
of the goal. Only after much circulation in the philosophic egg and only
after much passing through the prism of colors does that light dawn which
gives us the faint intimation of the outline of the prototype of all
lesser ideals. Whoever desires hope of a successful issue to this progress
must not forget a certain gentle fire that must operate from the beginning
to the end, namely Love.


    Whom these teachings cheer not,
    Deserves not to be a man.


